                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 1 of 57 
  
 
 
TITLE   
FDI Matchmaking at MSPO 2026 in Kielce, Poland 
 
SOLICITATION NUMBER 
 
27-317911-WSAW-SL 
DATE 
 
May 7, 2026 
OFFER DELIVERY 
 
In order for GAC to consider an offer valid, GAC must receive the offer no 
later than 10:00 AM EDT (Eastern Daylight Time) on May 18, 2026, referred 
to as the “Closing Date and Time”. 
 
Only electronic copies will be accepted and received at the following email 
address:  
 
internationalproposals@international.gc.ca 
 
Attention: SARAH-LYNN LAVENTURE AKA CANADA’S REPRESENTATIVE 
Solicitation #: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
This is a non-binding process that does not give rise to contractual 
obligations between Canada and each Offeror. The Offeror may withdraw 
their offer at any time. The Offeror has no obligation to Canada until, and 
unless it has entered into a contract to provide goods, services, or 
construction to Canada.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 2 of 57 
  
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. 
Solicitation of Offers. .................................................................................................. 3 
2. 
Security. ..................................................................................................................... 3 
3. 
Offeror Preparation. ................................................................................................... 3 
4. 
Offer Submission. ....................................................................................................... 4 
5. 
     Communications. ....................................................................................................... 6 
6. 
Contents of Offer. ....................................................................................................... 7 
7. 
Evaluation Procedures. ............................................................................................... 7 
8. 
Basis of Selection. .................................................................................................... 10 
9. 
Negotiation process. ................................................................................................. 11 
10. 
Offer Challenge and Recourse Mechanisms. .............................................................. 11 
Annex – Offeror Declaration Form ........................................................................................ 12 
Annex – Proposed Contract Clauses ..................................................................................... 16 
Annex – Solicitation of Offers - Definitions ........................................................................... 34 
Annex – Contract Definitions ............................................................................................... 38 
Annex – Statement of Work…………………………………………..…………………………………………………….41 
Annex – Basis of Payment .................................................................................................... 49 
Annex – Financial Offer Form ............................................................................................... 50 
Annex – Technical Evaluation Criteria ................................................................................... 51 
Annex – Security Requirements Check List ........................................................................... 55 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 3 of 57 
  
1. 
Solicitation of Offers. 
1.1. Introduction. Canada requests offers from Offerors to fulfill the needs of the Department of 
Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development (also known as “Global Affairs Canada” or “GAC”), set out in the 
annex “Statement of Work”. If a supplier is interested and able to meet these needs, Canada would 
appreciate and welcome an offer from such supplier. 
1.2. Non-legally Binding Process. The process set out in this Solicitation of Offers is not contractually 
binding on Canada and on the Offerors. An Offeror may revoke its offer at any time before acceptance 
by Canada of such offer. Under this process, no contract can arise without acceptance by Canada of an 
offer to contract, or without acceptance by an Offeror of a counteroffer to contract made by Canada to 
the Offeror. 
1.3. Offers. Canada is seeking offers from Offerors to provide to the Department of Foreign Affairs Trade 
and Development Canada professional services of a contractor specializing in the identification of 
investment prospects with strong expertise in the European defence and security market. The lead 
generator will organize a series of business-to-business (B2B) matchmaking meetings at the International 
Defence Industry Exhibition (MSPO 2026) in Kielce, Poland, from September 7 to 11, 2026, as described 
in the Annex - Statement of Work. 
1.4. Term. The period of the Contract is tentatively set for June 1, 2026, to October 9, 2026. However, in 
the event of unusual circumstances, the contract could be awarded at a sooner or later date. 
1.5. Trade agreements do apply to this process. The following trade agreements apply: 
- 
Canadian Free Trade Agreement (CFTA) 
- 
Canada–Chile Free Trade Agreement 
- 
Canada–Colombia Free Trade Agreement 
- 
Canada–Honduras Free Trade Agreement 
- 
Canada–Korea Free Trade Agreement 
- 
Canada–Panama Free Trade Agreement 
2. 
Security. 
2.1. Security Requirements. There are no security requirements applicable to this Contract. 
3. 
Offeror Preparation. 
3.1. Offeror Responsibilities. Each Offeror should:  
a. prepare its offer in accordance with the solicitation of offers instructions; 
b. obtain any clarification it considers necessary before submitting an offer; 
c. 
submit a complete offer by the Closing Date and Time as per the instructions noted in section 
titled "Offer Submission". Canada will not consider an offer made after the Closing Date and 
Time; and, 
d. provide a comprehensible and sufficiently detailed offer, including all information requested 
pursuant to the enclosed annexes.  
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 4 of 57 
  
3.2. Legal Capacity. For an offer to be considered by Canada the Offeror must have the legal capacity to 
contract. If the Offeror is a sole proprietorship, a partnership (if common law) or a general partnership 
(at civil law), or a corporate body, the Offeror should provide, if requested by Canada’s Representative, a 
statement and any requested supporting documentation indicating the laws under which it is registered 
or incorporated together with the registered or corporate name and place of business. This also applies 
to Offerors submitting an offer as a joint venture. An offer cannot be assigned or transferred in whole or 
in part. 
3.3. Compliance with Code of Conduct. Canada will not consider an offer by an Offeror who did not 
indicate, as set out in the Annex – Offer Submission Form, that they apply Canada's Code of Conduct for 
Procurement. 
3.4. Conflict of Interest.  
Canada may reject an offer if the Offeror, any of its subcontractors, or any of their respective employees 
or former employees  
a. was involved in any manner in the preparation of the solicitation of offers or in any situation of 
conflict of interest or appearance of a conflict of interest, or 
b. had access to information related to the solicitation of offers that was not available to other 
Offerors and that would, in Canada's opinion, give or appear to give the Offeror an unfair 
advantage. 
3.5. Experience Not an Unfair Advantage. Canada will not consider the experience that any Offeror has 
acquired by providing the goods and/or services described in this solicitation of offers (or similar goods 
and/or services), as conferring, in itself, an unfair advantage or creating a conflict of interest. 
 
3.6. Notification of Rejection. If Canada intends to reject an offer outright, Canada’s Representative will 
so inform the Offeror and may provide to the Offeror an opportunity to make representations. 
3.7. Former Public Servants. Canada requests that Offerors who are Former Public Servants in receipt 
of a Pension or Lump Sum Payment provide the requested information in the Annex- Offeror Declaration 
Form. 
4. 
Offer Submission. 
4.1. Offer Receipt. Canada will only consider offers submitted electronically to the email address 
indicated on the tender notice by the Closing Date and Time. Canada will not consider offers submitted 
in any other manner or at a later date.   
4.2. Submission Process and Offer Format.  
a. An Offeror may repeal its offer at any time. An Offeror may modify its offer prior to the 
solicitation of offers Closing Date and Time. The latest offer received from a given Offeror will 
supersede any offer previously received from that Offeror. If the Offeror provides 
simultaneous copies of its offer and there is a discrepancy between the wording of any of 
these copies, the wording of the last received offer will supersede any previously received 
offers. 
b. Offers should be in Portable Document Format (.pdf) or Microsoft Office 2003 or greater. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 5 of 57 
  
c. 
Each Offeror should ensure that its name and the solicitation of offers number are referenced 
in the email subject line. 
d. Offerors may submit their documents and supporting information in either English or French. 
Canada may decide not to consider offers received in any other language.   
e. Canada has the capacity to receive multiple documents, however, with a limit of 10MB per 
email. For security reasons, Canada cannot accept: 
i. files using .rar, encrypted PDF, or .exe; 
ii. links to online storage or a File Transfer Protocol service; and, 
iii. files that contain executable code, including macros. 
4.3. Acknowledgement of Receipt. Canada cannot guarantee receipt of an offer sent through 
electronic means and will not be responsible for any failure attributable to the transmission or receipt of 
an electronic offer. Therefore, it is recommended that an Offeror seek acknowledgement of receipt from 
Canada. The offer receiving unit may send an acknowledgement of the receipt of offer document(s) via 
email. This acknowledgement will confirm only the receipt of offer document(s) and will not confirm if 
Canada is able to open the attachments or that the content is readable. 
4.4. Offer Sections. To facilitate the comparison of offers, Canada requests that the Offerors submit 
their offers separated into the following sections: 
a. Section I: Offeror Declaration Form; 
b. Section II: Technical Offer;  
c. 
Section III: Financial Offer; and 
d. Section IV: Proposed changes to the contractual terms and conditions in Annex – Proposed 
contract clauses (if applicable). 
4.5. No return. Canada will not return to sender the documentation comprising the offers it receives. 
However, Canada will treat all offers as confidential, subject to the provisions of the Access to 
Information Act and the Privacy Act. 
4.6. Technical Difficulties of Offer Transmission. Despite anything to the contrary in this solicitation of 
offers, where an Offeror has commenced transmission of its offer through an electronic submission in 
advance of the solicitation of offers Closing Date and Time, but due to technical difficulties, Canada was 
unable to receive or decode the entirety of the Offer by the deadline, Canada may nonetheless accept 
the entirety of the Offer received after the solicitation of offers Closing Date and Time, provided that the 
Offeror demonstrates the following: 
a. The offeror contacted Canada in advance of the solicitation of offers Closing Date and Time to 
attempt to resolve its technical difficulties; OR 
b. The electronic properties of the Offer documentation clearly indicate that all components of 
the Offer were prepared in advance of the solicitation of offers Closing Date and Time.  
4.7. Completeness of the Offer. At any time, including after the Closing Date and Time, Canada may 
examine the offer to determine completeness (i.e. responsiveness to the instructions and needs 
indicated in the solicitation of offers). The review for completeness will be limited to rectifying errors of 
form, for example, whether the information submitted can be accessed and opened. This review does 
not constitute an evaluation of the content or an evaluation of the responsiveness of the offer to the 
requirement. Canada can provide the Offeror with the opportunity to submit information found to be 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 6 of 57 
  
missing or incomplete in this review. After reviewing an offer, Canada may consider it to be complete 
when the following elements have been submitted by the offeror:  
a. the certifications and securities (if required); 
b. the complete and accurate Offeror’s identity with supporting documentation; and  
c. 
that all documents (including certifications, declarations and proofs) created prior to offer 
closing but due to technical difficulties Canada was unable to receive them, have been 
properly submitted and received by Canada. 
4.8. Provision of Documentation. When this solicitation of offers document is posted publicly to 
CanadaBuys (https://canadabuys.canada.ca/en), Canada will concurrently or subsequently make the 
associated Notices of Proposed Procurement, amendments to the solicitation of offers (including 
significant enquiries received and their replies), and all related documents available for download 
through CanadaBuys. Canada is not responsible and will not assume any liability whatsoever for the 
information found on websites of third Parties. Canada will not notify Offerors if it amends a Notice of 
Proposed Procurement, a solicitation of offers, or any related documentation. Offerors are responsible 
for regularly consulting CanadaBuys for the most up-to-date information. Canada will not assume liability 
for any oversight on the Offeror's part nor for notification services offered by a third Party. When this 
solicitation of offers document is not posted to CanadaBuys and instead sent directly to potential 
Offerors, Canada will send the related documents (including amendments and significant enquires 
received) directly to the Offerors invited to submit an offer.  
4.9. Offer Costs. The Offeror is solely responsible for all costs associated with preparing and submitting 
its offer, as well as any costs it incurs in relation to the evaluation of its offer. 
4.10. Entire Requirement. The solicitation of offers documents contain all the requirements, instructions 
and other documentation relating to the solicitation of offers; no other information or documentation is 
relevant. Offerors should not assume that practices used under previous non-binding solicitations of 
offers, under contractually binding requests for proposals or under contracts for the procurement of 
goods or services will continue or that the Offeror's existing capabilities meet the needs of the 
solicitation of offers simply because they have fulfilled previous needs or requirements. 
5. 
Communications. 
5.1. Communications During Solicitation of Offers Period. To ensure the integrity of the competitive 
process, Canada requests that each Offeror direct all questions and other communications regarding the 
solicitation of offers only to Canada’s Representative identified in the solicitation of offers. Canada’s 
Representative may reject an offer from an Offeror that sends communications in another manner or to 
another person. 
a. Period for Questions. Offerors should submit all questions in writing no later than 5 business 
days before the offer Closing Date and Time. Canada will likely not respond to questions 
submitted after this deadline. 
b. Detail of Questions. Offerors should accurately reference the numbered item of the 
solicitation of offers to which the question relates and explain each question in sufficient detail 
to enable Canada to provide an accurate answer. 
c. 
Proprietary Questions. For any technical questions containing proprietary information, 
Offerors should clearly mark those questions as "proprietary". Canada will treat such questions 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 7 of 57 
  
as proprietary except where Canada determines that the question is not of a proprietary 
nature. Canada may edit the question(s) or may request that the Offeror revise the question(s) 
to eliminate the proprietary nature of the question(s) so that Canada can provide the answer 
to all Offerors. Canada will likely not answer questions that are in a form it cannot distribute to 
all Offerors. 
5.2. Offer Debriefings. Offerors may request a debriefing on the results of the solicitation of offers 
process. Offerors should make such a request to Canada’s Representative within 15 business days from 
its receipt of the results of the solicitation of offers process. Canada will provide the debriefing in writing, 
by telephone, or in person, at Canada’s option.  
6. 
Contents of Offer. 
6.1. Offeror Declaration Form. Canada requests that each Offeror includes the Annex - Offeror 
Declaration Form whereby the Offeror provides information to Canada and certifies it. If Canada 
determines that the information in the Offeror Declaration Form requires completion or correction, 
Canada will provide the Offeror with a deadline to do so. 
6.2. Technical Offer Contents.  
a. Technical Criteria. The Offeror should explain in its offer how the latter fulfills all evaluation 
criteria set out in the Annex – Technical Criteria. Simply repeating a statement contained in the 
solicitation of offers is not sufficient. Canada will rate the offer against those criteria.  
b. Response. In its response to the evaluation criteria, the Offerors should:  
i. demonstrate their understanding of the needs contained in the solicitation of offers; and 
ii. concisely explain how they will meet these needs. 
c. 
Organization. Offerors should address and present topics in the order of the evaluation criteria 
under the same headings. To avoid duplication, an Offeror may refer to different sections of its 
offer by identifying where it has already addressed the subject topic, by identifying the specific 
paragraph and page. 
6.3. Financial Offer Contents. An Offeror must submit their financial offer in accordance with Annex – 
Financial Offer Form. 
6.4. Exchange Rate Fluctuation. Canada may decide not to accept to mitigate exchange rate fluctuation 
risks for this solicitation of offers. Canada may reject an offer solely on this basis.  
 
6.5. Proposed Changes to the Contractual Terms and Conditions in Annex – Proposed contract 
clauses.  An Offeror should indicate any amendment it would request to the proposed contractual terms 
and conditions, with a view to making the contract workable in practice. The Offeror should further set 
out how the change will affect for Canada the balance of risks and the cost of the contract (aside from 
price). 
7. 
Evaluation Procedures. 
7.1. Evaluation Team. An evaluation team composed of representatives of Canada will evaluate the 
offers. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 8 of 57 
  
7.2. Technical Evaluation. Canada will review each offer against the technical criteria as per Annex - 
Technical Criteria applying the methodology set out in that annex. Any element of the technical criteria 
identified specifically with the words “must” or “mandatory” is one that Canada considers to be 
essential. Canada will disregard as non-responsive offers that fail to meet “mandatory” or “essential” 
requirements. 
7.3. Financial Evaluation.  
a. Evaluation of Price. Canada will evaluate all offers in Euros (€) in the attached Financial Offer 
Form. 
b. Price Justification. If an offer is the sole offer received, Canada will likely request from the 
Offeror, one or more of the following:  
i. a current published price list indicating the percentage discount available to Canada; 
ii. a copy of paid invoices for the like quality and quantity of the goods, services, or both sold 
to other customers; 
iii. a price breakdown of all costs (including labour, materials, transport, general and 
administrative overhead, transportation, etc.) and profit; 
iv. price or rate certifications; and 
v. any other supporting documentation that Canada may request. 
7.4. Assessment. Canada will assess offers in accordance with the entire requirement of the solicitation 
of offers. Canada will reject, as non-responsive, any offer that fails to meet all “mandatory” or “essential” 
solicitation requirements. 
7.5. Support for Offer Requirements. Canada may, but will have no obligation to, do the following:  
a. seek clarification or verification as to any information provided, 
b. contact any references to verify any information the Offeror submitted, 
c. 
request information about the Offeror’s legal status, 
d. conduct a survey of the Offeror’s facilities, 
e. examine the Offeror's technical, managerial, and financial capabilities, 
f. 
correct any error in  
i. the extended pricing of offers by using unit pricing, or 
ii. the quantities in offers to reflect the quantities stated in the solicitation of offers (and, in 
the case of error in the extension of prices, the unit price will govern), 
g. independently verify any information the Offeror provided.  
 
7.6. Timeline. If the Offeror does not comply with a request by Canada, within the time specified in 
Canada’s request, to allow Canada to complete its evaluation of the offer, Canada may reject the offer or 
evaluate it without the benefit of the requested information.  
7.7. Evaluation Based on Documents Provided. Unless otherwise specified in this solicitation of offers, 
Canada will evaluate only the documentation provided in the offer and may discard information it could 
not verify pursuant to the section entitled Support for Offer Requirements. Canada will not consider as 
part of the offer information and documentation available from other sources but not submitted with 
the offer such as references to website addresses where additional information can be found, or 
technical manuals or brochures. 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 9 of 57 
  
7.8. Rights of Canada. Canada may:  
a. reject any or all offers in response to the solicitation of offers; 
b. enter into negotiations with one, several or all Offerors on any or all aspects of their offers; 
c. 
cancel the solicitation at any time; 
d. reissue the solicitation; 
e. if no compliant offers are received and the requirement is not substantially modified, reissue 
the solicitation of offers by inviting only the Offerors who submitted an offer to resubmit 
within a period designated by Canada; or 
f. 
negotiate with the sole compliant Offeror. 
7.9. Rejection of Offer. Canada may reject an offer where:  
a. Bankruptcy. The Offeror is bankrupt, or its activities are inoperable for an extended period; 
b. Improper Conduct. The Offeror or an employee or subcontractor included as part of the offer:  
i. is subject to a Vendor Performance Corrective Measure, under the Vendor Performance 
Corrective Measure Policy, which renders them ineligible to offer on the requirement; 
ii. based on evidence satisfactory to Canada, has committed fraud, bribery, fraudulent 
misrepresentation or failed to comply with laws protecting individuals against any manner 
of discrimination; 
iii. based on evidence satisfactory to Canada, has conducted themselves improperly in the 
past (for example, conduct that does not align with the Code of Conduct for Procurement); 
c. 
Suspension or Termination. The Offeror or an employee or subcontractor included as part of 
the offer has been suspended or terminated by Canada for default under a contract with 
Canada; 
d. Poor Performance. In Canada’s opinion, the Offeror’s performance on other contracts, 
including the efficiency and workmanship as well as the extent to which the Offeror performed 
the work in accordance with contractual clauses and conditions, is sufficiently poor to 
jeopardize the successful completion of the current requirement; and 
e. Not Good Value. In Canada’s opinion, the offer does not provide good value to Canada. 
 
7.10. Prejudicing Integrity or Fairness - Multiple Offers from Single Offeror or Joint Venture. Canada 
may apply additional scrutiny when it receives multiple offers in response to a solicitation of offers from 
a single Offeror or a Joint Venture. Canada may reject any offer submitted by a single Offeror or Joint 
Venture if their inclusion  
a. in the evaluation has the effect of prejudicing the integrity and fairness of the process, or 
b. in the procurement process would distort the solicitation of offers evaluation or would not 
provide good value to Canada. 
 
7.11. Ability to Make Representations. If Canada intends to reject an offer under the section entitled 
Rejection of Offer (c) or (d), Canada’s Representative will inform the Offeror and may give the Offeror 
ten (10) calendar days within which to make representations, before making a final decision on the offer 
rejection. 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 10 of 57 
  
8. 
Basis of Selection. 
8.1. Highest Combined Rating of Technical Criteria and Price. For each responsive offer, the technical 
score and the pricing score will be added to determine its combined rating. The responsive offer with the 
highest combined rating of technical criteria and price will be recommended for award of a contract. 
8.2. To be declared responsive, an offer must:  
a. comply with all the requirements of the offer solicitation;   
b. meet all mandatory technical evaluation criteria; and,  
c. 
obtain the required minimum of 48 points overall for the technical evaluation criteria which 
are subject to point rating. The rating is performed on a scale of 90 points.  
IMPORTANT: A Bidder must obtain a minimum of 48 points for the optional point-rated criterion be 
added to the final score. 
 
8.3. Offers not meeting (a) or (b) or (c) will be declared non-responsive or non-compliant. Neither the 
responsive offer that receives the highest number of points nor the one that proposed the lowest price 
will necessarily be accepted. 
 
8.4. The selection will be based on the highest responsive combined rating of technical criteria and 
price. The ratio will be 70% for the technical criteria and 30% for the price. 
8.5. The technical score for each responsive offer will be determined by adding the total number of 
points obtained using the point-rated technical criteria. The overall technical score will be determined by 
dividing the technical score (total number of points obtained) by 90 points (maximum number of points 
available) and multiplying by the ratio of 70%.  
8.6. The pricing score for each responsive offer will be determined as follows: each responsive offer will 
be prorated against the lowest evaluated price and the ratio of 30 %.  
8.7. For each responsive offer, the technical score and the pricing score will be added to determine its 
combined rating. The responsive offer with the highest combined rating of technical criteria and price 
will be recommended for award of a contract. 
 
THE FOLLOWING TABLE IS FOR ILLUSTRATIVE PURPOSES ONLY 
 
Offeror 1 
Offeror 2 
Offeror 3 
Technical Score 
80/90 
71/90 
15/ 90 
Offer Evaluated Price 
$55,000 
$50,000 
Non-responsive 
Calculations 
Overall Technical Score 
(80/90) x 70 = 62.22 
(65/90) x 70 = 50.55 
Non-responsive 
Pricing Score 
(50/55) x 30 = 27.27 
(50/50) x 30 = 30.00 
Non-responsive 
Combined Rating 
89.49 
83.55 
Non-responsive 
Result 
1st  
2nd  
Non-responsive 
*In the above scenario, Offeror 1 would be declared the successful bidder. 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 11 of 57 
  
9. 
Negotiation process.  
9.1. Canada’s Acceptance or Request to Negotiate. Upon determination of the preferred Offeror, 
Canada will invite the Offeror who proposed it to enter into a contract with Canada. Canada may either 
accept the offer as is or propose adjustments to the offer.  
9.2. Negotiation. If, after ten (10) business days, Canada and the preferred Offeror are unable to reach 
an agreement on contractual terms, Canada may reject the offer from the preferred Offeror and 
commence negotiations with the next ranked Offeror.   
10. Offer Challenge and Recourse Mechanisms.  
10.1. Challenges to Procurement Process. Several mechanisms are available to potential suppliers to 
challenge aspects of the procurement process up to and including entering into a contract. Canada 
encourages suppliers to bring their concerns first to the attention of Canada’s Representative. Potential 
complaint bodies include:  
a. The Office of the Procurement Ombudsman (OPO); and 
b. The Canadian International Trade Tribunal (CITT) 
 
10.2. Deadlines for Filing Complaints. There are strict deadlines for filing complaints; the time periods 
vary depending on the particular complaint body. Suppliers should therefore act quickly when they want 
to challenge any aspect of the procurement process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 12 of 57 
  
Annex – Offeror Declaration Form 
1. Offeror’s Full Legal Name 
The Offeror is the person or entity (or, for a Joint Venture, the persons or entities) submitting the proposal. 
Offerors who are part of a corporate group should identify the corporation that is the actual Offeror. 
Offeror's Full Legal 
Name 
2. Offeror’s Full Legal Address 
Offeror’s Full Legal 
Address 
 
3. Ownership Structure 
Offerors who are incorporated, including those submitting an offer as a Joint Venture, should provide a 
complete list of names of all individuals who are currently Directors of the Offeror. Offerors submitting an 
offer as sole proprietorship, as well as those submitting an offer as a Joint Venture, should provide the name 
of the owner(s). Offerors bidding as societies, firms or partnerships do not need to provide any information 
for this section.    
Director(s) of the 
Offeror 
 
Name of the Owner(s) 
 
4. Identification of Joint Venture Parties 
For a proposal submitted on behalf of a Joint Venture, provide the information or indicate “N/A” if not 
applicable. If Canada accepts a contract with a Joint Venture, all members of the Joint Venture will be jointly 
and severally or solidarily liable for the performance of any resulting contract. 
☐ The Offeror is a Joint Venture.  
☐ The Offeror is not a Joint Venture  
Legal Name(s) of Joint 
Venture Member 
 
Legal Address(es) of 
Joint Venture Member 
 
Name of the Joint 
Venture, if applicable 
5. Authorized Representative of the Offeror 
Please provide the contact information for the representative authorized to represent the Offeror. 
Name 
Title 
Telephone Number 
Email 
6. Electronic Payments 
The Offeror accepts the following payments (please check all that apply): 
☐ Direct Deposit 
☐ Wire Transfer 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 13 of 57 
  
7. Language preferences 
The Offeror wishes that communications and documents be made in:  
☐ English 
☐ French 
8. Subcontractors 
As per proposed contract clause Subcontracts, Canada may reject an offer which includes the use of a 
subcontractor for the Work. Please indicate below whether the Offeror intends to use a subcontractor(s) to 
complete the Work.  
☐ The Offeror intends to use a subcontractor(s).  
☐ The Offeror does not intend to use a subcontractor(s).  
Legal Name(s) of 
Subcontractor(s) 
Legal Address(es) of 
Subcontractor(s) 
 
Authorized 
Representative of 
Subcontractor(s) 
Name 
Title 
 
Telephone Number 
Email 
9. Accuracy and Integrity 
Accuracy of 
information 
☐ All the information that the Offeror submits with its offer is true, accurate, and 
complete as of the date indicated below. 
Code of Conduct for 
Procurement 
☐ The Offeror has reviewed and will apply Canada’s Code of Conduct for 
Procurement. 
Canada’s Ineligibility 
and Suspension Policy 
The Offeror understands that: 
☐ Canada will apply its Ineligibility and Suspension Policy. 
☐ Under certain circumstances, as described in the Policy, Canada may determine 
that an Offeror is ineligible or suspended. Canada is unlikely to accept an offer 
where an Offeror is ineligible or suspended.   
☐ Canada may request additional information, certifications, and validations from 
the Offeror for the purpose of making a determination.  
10. Offeror Resources 
The Offeror, if contracting with Canada, will provide the resources proposed in its offer 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 14 of 57 
  
Named individuals 
☐ The Offeror certifies that every individual proposed in the offer will be available 
to perform the Work as required by and at the time specified in this solicitation of 
offers. 
Non-employees 
☐ The Offeror certifies that it has the consent of every non-employee to perform 
the services proposed in the offer and to submit each non-employee's résumé to 
Canada. 
Canada may reject an offer for which the Offeror has not, upon Canada's request, provided a written 
confirmation, signed by the individual, of that permission and of the resource's availability. 
11. Former Public Servant 
Contracts entered into with former public servants ("FPS") who receive a federal government pension or 
lump sum payment must bear the closest public scrutiny and reflect fairness in the spending of public funds. 
To comply with Treasury Board policies and directives on contracts with FPS, Offerors must provide the 
information required below before entering into the contract award.  
Is the Offeror an FPS 
who receives a 
pension? 
☐ Yes (If yes, please fill out Former Public Servant - Form Receipt of Pension) 
☐ No 
Is the Offeror an FPS 
who received a lump 
sum payment under a 
Work Force 
Adjustment Directive? 
☐ Yes (If yes, please fill out Former Public Servant - Form Receipt of Lump Sum 
Payment) 
☐ No 
11.1 Form: Former Public Servant - Receipt of Pension 
Canada requires that, if the Offeror is in receipt of a pension, the Offeror provide the following information 
for each FPS in receipt of a pension. Each Offeror acknowledges that the successful Offeror’s status, with 
respect to being a former public servant who received a pension, will be reported on departmental websites 
as part of the published proactive disclosure reports in accordance with Contracting Policy Notice and the 
Guidelines on the Proactive Disclosure of Contracts. 
a. Name of former 
public servant 
 
Date of termination of 
employment or 
retirement from the 
Public Service 
b. Name of former 
public servant 
Date of termination of 
employment or 
retirement from the 
Public Service 
11.2 Form: Former Public Servant - Receipt of Lump Sum Payment 
If the Offeror is in receipt of a lump sum payment, please provide the following information. For all contracts 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 15 of 57 
  
awarded entered into during the lump sum payment period, the total amount of fees that may be paid to an 
FPS who received a lump sum payment is $5,000, including Applicable Taxes. Each Offeror acknowledges 
that the successful Offeror’s status, with respect to being a former public servant who received a lump sum 
payment, will be reported on departmental websites as part of the published proactive disclosure reports in 
accordance with Contracting Policy Notice and the Guidelines on the Proactive Disclosure of Contracts. 
a. Name of former public servant 
Conditions of the lump sum payment 
incentive 
Date of termination of employment 
 
Amount of lump-sum payment 
 
Rate of pay on which lump sum 
payment is based 
Period of lump-sum payment (start 
date, end date and number of weeks) 
Number and amount of other 
contracts subject to the restrictions of 
a workforce adjustment program 
b. Name of former public servant 
Conditions of the lump sum payment 
incentive 
 
Date of termination of employment 
Amount of lump-sum payment 
 
Rate of pay on which lump sum 
payment is based 
Period of lump-sum payment (start 
date, end date, and number of weeks) 
 
Number and amount of other 
contracts subject to the restrictions of 
a workforce adjustment program 
Signatures 
Signature of representative 
authorized to sign on behalf of 
the Offeror 
Name: 
Title: 
Date: 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 16 of 57 
  
Annex - Proposed Contract Clauses 
1. 
Summary. 
1.1 Contract Summary. The Contract is for the professional services of a service provider specializing in 
the identification of investment prospects with strong expertise in the European defence and 
security market. The lead generator will organize a series of business-to-business (B2B) matchmaking 
meetings at the International Defence Industry Exhibition (MSPO 2026) in Kielce, Poland, from 
September 7 to 11, 2026, as described in the Annex - Statement of Work. 
2. 
Performance of Work. 
2.1. Security Requirement.  
There is no security requirement applicable to this Contract 
2.2. Conduct of the Work.  
a. Performance. Subject to section “Suspension of the Work”, the Contractor agrees to fulfill all 
obligations in full compliance with the requirements and Specifications of the Contract, 
regardless of any potential dispute with Canada. The Contractor must:  
i. perform the Work diligently and efficiently; 
ii. except for Government Property, supply everything necessary to perform the Work; 
iii. use, as a minimum, quality assurance procedures, inspections and controls generally used 
and recognized by the industry to ensure the degree of quality required by the Contract; 
iv. select and employ a sufficient number of qualified people; and 
v. perform the Work in accordance with standards of quality acceptable to Canada and in full 
conformity with the Specifications and all the requirements of the Contract. 
b. Responsibilities. The Contractor is fully responsible for performing the Work. Canada will not 
be responsible for any negative consequences or extra costs if the Contractor follows any 
advice given by Canada unless the Contracting Authority provides the advice to the Contractor 
in writing and includes a statement specifically relieving the Contractor of any responsibility 
for negative consequences or extra costs that might result from following the advice. 
c. 
The Contractor represents and warrants that it and all its resources and subcontractors:  
i. are competent to perform the Work; 
ii. have everything necessary to perform the Work, including the resources, facilities, labour, 
technology, equipment, and materials; 
iii. have the necessary qualifications, including knowledge, skill, know-how and experience, 
and the ability to use them effectively to perform the Work; and 
iv. will maintain any credentials, accreditations, licenses and certifications necessary to 
perform the Work throughout the duration of the Contract. 
d. Reports. The Contractor must provide all reports that are required by the Contract and any 
other information that Canada may reasonably require from time to time. 
2.3. Access to Facilities and Equipment.  
a. Canada's facilities, equipment and personnel are not available to the Contractor to perform 
the Work unless the Contract specifically provides for it. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 17 of 57 
  
b. The Contractor is responsible for advising the Contracting Authority in advance if it requires 
access to Canada's facilities, equipment or personnel to perform the Work. 
c. 
The Contractor must comply and ensure that its employees and subcontractors comply with all 
security measures, standing orders, policies or other rules in force at the site where the 
Contractor is performing the Work. 
d. The Contractor must only use Canada’s facilities and equipment for the performance of the 
Contract. 
2.4. Personnel.  
a. Personnel. The Contractor’s personnel identified in the Contract to perform the Work must be 
competent and suitable for performing the Work and conduct themselves properly. 
b. Replacement of Personnel. The Contractor must provide the services of the individuals 
identified in the Contract unless the Contractor is unable to do so for reasons beyond its 
control. If the Contractor is unable to provide the services of any personnel identified in the 
Contract, the Contractor must provide written notice to Canada of the intended replacement 
with similar qualifications and experience. The Contractor’s written notice must include (i) the 
reason for the replacement, (ii) the name and qualifications of the replacement individual, and 
(iii) proof that the proposed replacement has the required security clearance from Canada. 
Any proposed replacements of personnel are subject to Canada’s acceptance.  
c. 
Replacements at Canada’s Request. The Contracting Authority may order that an individual 
acting as a replacement stop performing the Work. In such a case, the Contractor must 
immediately comply with the order and arrange for a further replacement in accordance with 
the terms of “Replacement of Personnel” above. The fact that the Contracting Authority does 
not order that an individual identified in the Contract or a replacement stop performing the 
Work does not relieve the Contractor from its responsibility to meet the requirements of the 
Contract. 
2.5. Subcontracts.  
a. Subcontracting Requirements. The Contractor may subcontract the performance of the Work, 
provided:  
i. the Contractor obtains the Contracting Authority’s prior written consent; 
ii. any subcontractor is bound by conditions compatible with the terms of the Contract and, in 
the opinion of the Contracting Authority, not less favourable to Canada than the conditions 
of the Contract, with the exception of requirements under the Federal Contractors Program 
for employment equity which only apply to the Contractor; and 
iii. the Contractor remains liable to Canada for all the Work performed by the subcontractor. 
b. Cases Where Consent for Subcontracting Not Required. The Contractor is not required to 
obtain consent for subcontracts specifically authorized in the Contract. The Contractor may 
also without the consent of the Contracting Authority:  
i. purchase "off-the-shelf" items and any standard articles and materials ordinarily produced 
by manufacturers in the normal course of business; 
ii. subcontract any incidental services that would ordinarily be subcontracted in performing 
the Work; 
iii. subcontract any portion of the Work as is customary in the carrying out of similar 
Contracts, up to a total value of 40 percent of the Contract Price; and 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 18 of 57 
  
iv. permit its subcontractors at any tier to make purchases or subcontract as permitted in 
paragraphs (b)i), (b)ii), and (b)iii). 
c. 
Contractor Responsibilities. Notwithstanding any subcontracting that is subject to Canada’s 
consent, the Contractor is responsible for performing the Contract and Canada is not 
responsible to any subcontractor. The Contractor is responsible for any matters or things done 
or provided by any subcontractor under the Contract and for paying any subcontractors for any 
part of the Work they perform. 
2.6. Specifications. 
a. Canada owns all Specifications it provides the Contractor and the Contractor must only use 
them to perform the Work. 
b. If Canada approves Specifications furnished by the Contractor, that approval will not relieve 
the Contractor if its responsibility to meet all requirements of the Contract.  
3. 
Term of the Contract. 
3.1. Contract Period. The period of the Contract is from the date of award shown on the front page of 
the Contract until October 9, 2026, inclusive. 
4. 
Transportation. 
4.1. Transportation Costs and Carrier Liability.  
a. Transportation Costs. If transportation costs are payable by Canada under the Contract and 
the Contractor makes the transportation arrangements, the Contractor must ship using the 
most direct and economical means consistent with normal shipping practice. The Contractor 
must show these costs as a separate item on the invoice. 
b. Transportation Carriers’ Liability. The federal government's policy of underwriting its own 
risks precludes payment of insurance or valuation charges for transportation beyond the point 
at which ownership of goods passes to the federal government determined by the Incoterms 
applicable to the Contract. Where increased carrier liability is available without charge, the 
Contractor must obtain the increased liability for shipment. 
5. 
 Inspection and Acceptance. 
5.1. Inspection, Rejection and Cure.  
a. Canada’s Rights. All the Work is subject to inspection and acceptance by Canada.  
i. Inspection and Acceptance. Canada has the right to inspect and accept all Work. Canada’s 
inspection and acceptance of the Work by Canada do not relieve the Contractor of its 
responsibility for defects or other failures to meet the requirements of the Contract. 
ii. Rejection and Cure. If Canada rejects any Work, it may require the Contractor to correct or 
replace the Work at no additional cost. 
b. Contractor’s Obligations.  
i. Access to Locations. The Contractor must provide representatives of Canada access to all 
locations where any part of the Work is being performed at any time during working hours. 
Representatives of Canada may make examinations and such tests of the Work as they may 
think fit. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 19 of 57 
  
ii. Assistance. The Contractor must provide all assistance and facilities, test pieces, samples, 
and documentation that the representatives of Canada may reasonably require for the 
carrying out of the inspection. The Contractor must forward such test pieces and samples 
to such person or location as Canada specifies. 
iii. Contractor Inspection. The Contractor must inspect and approve any part of the Work 
before submitting it for acceptance or delivering it to Canada. 
iv. Inspection Records. The Contractor must keep accurate and complete inspection records 
that must be made available to Canada on request. Representatives of Canada may make 
copies and take extracts of the records during the performance of the Contract and for up 
to three years after the end of the Contract. 
6. 
Basis of Payment. 
6.1. Basis of Payment. Canada will pay the Contractor in accordance with the Basis of Payment 
included as Annex – Basis of Payment. Payment under this Contract, except advance payments, will be 
conditional on the performance, completion and delivery of the Work, or any part of the Work to the 
satisfaction of Canada. 
7. 
Fees. 
7.1. Limitation of Price. Canada will not pay the Contractor for any design changes, modifications or 
interpretations of the Work unless they have been approved, in writing, by the Contracting Authority 
before their incorporation into the Work. 
8. 
Payments. 
8.1. Invoices.  
a. Invoice Submission. The Contractor must submit invoices for each delivery in accordance with 
the Contract. Each invoice must indicate whether it covers partial or final delivery. 
b. Invoice Details. Invoices must show:  
i. the date, the name and address of the department, item or reference numbers, deliverable 
or description of the Work, and contract number; 
ii. details of expenditures (such as item, quantity, unit of issue, unit price, fixed time labour 
rates and level of effort, subcontracts, as applicable) in accordance with the Basis of 
Payment, exclusive of Applicable Taxes; 
iii. deduction for holdback, if applicable; 
iv. the extension of the totals, if applicable; 
v. if applicable, the method of delivery together with date, case numbers and part or 
reference numbers, shipment charges and any other additional charges; and 
vi. Applicable Taxes as a separate item along with corresponding registration numbers from 
the tax authorities. The Contractor must identify on all invoices all items that are zero-
rated, exempt or to which Applicable Taxes do not apply. 
c. 
Payment of Taxes. Canada will pay Applicable Taxes. It is the sole responsibility of the 
Contractor to charge Applicable Taxes at the correct rate. The Contractor must pay Applicable 
Taxes, ancillary taxes, and any commodity tax, on taxable goods or services used or consumed 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 20 of 57 
  
in the performance of the Contract (in accordance with applicable legislation), including for 
material incorporated into real property. 
d. Exemptions. The Contractor is not entitled to use Canada’s exemptions from any tax, such as 
provincial sales taxes, unless otherwise specified by law. 
e. Withholding for Non-Residents. Canada will withhold 15 percent of the amount to pay the 
Contractor in respect of services provided in Canada if the Contractor is not a resident of 
Canada unless the Contractor obtains a valid waiver from the Canada Revenue Agency. 
 
8.2. Payment Period. Canada will pay the Contractor’s undisputed invoice amount within 30 days after 
receipt of invoice in acceptable form and content. In the event an invoice is not of an acceptable form 
and content, Canada will notify the Contractor within 15 days of receipt, and the 30-day payment period 
will begin on receipt of a conforming invoice. 
8.3. Late Payments.  
a. Interest on Late Payments. Canada will pay the Contractor simple interest at the Average Rate 
plus 3 percent per year on any amount that is Overdue, from the date that amount becomes 
Overdue until the day before the date of payment, inclusive. The Contractor is not required to 
provide notice to Canada for interest payable. 
b. Exceptions. Canada will pay interest only if Canada is responsible for the delay in paying the 
Contractor. Canada will not pay interest on Overdue advance payments. 
8.4. Electronic Payment of Invoices. The Contractor accepts that Canada will use the following 
electronic payment instruments: 
a. Wire Transfer (International Only) 
8.5. Right to Set-Off. When Canada makes a payment to the Contractor, Canada may deduct any 
amount payable to Canada by the Contractor under this or any other current contract. 
9. 
Method of Payment. 
9.1. Milestone Payment. Canada will pay the Contractor upon completion and delivery of the Work in 
accordance with the payment provisions of the Contract if:  
a. the Contractor has properly submitted an accurate and complete invoice along with any other 
necessary documents 
b. Canada has verified all such documents, and 
c. 
Canada has accepted the Work performed. 
10.  Ownership and Risk of Loss. 
10.1. Ownership.  
a. Transfer of Ownership to Canada. Unless provided otherwise, the Work or any part of the 
Work belongs to Canada after acceptance by or on behalf of Canada. 
b. Partial Payments. However, if any payment is made to the Contractor for or on account of any 
work, either by way of progress or milestone payments, that work paid for by Canada belongs 
to Canada upon such payment being made. This transfer of ownership does not constitute 
acceptance by Canada of the Work or any part of the Work and does not relieve the 
Contractor of its obligation to perform the Work in accordance with the Contract. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 21 of 57 
  
10.2. Risk of Loss. Despite any transfer of ownership, the Contractor is responsible for any loss or 
damage the Contractor or its subcontractor causes to the Work or any part of the Work in accordance 
with the Contract. 
10.3. Title. Upon transfer of ownership to the Work or any part of the Work to Canada, the Contractor 
must, if requested by Canada, establish to Canada's satisfaction that the title is free and clear of all 
claims, liens, attachments, charges or encumbrances. The Contractor must execute any conveyances and 
other instruments necessary to perfect the title that Canada may require. 
11. Government Property. 
11.1. Care of Property. The Contractor must take reasonable and proper care of all Government 
Property while it is in its possession or subject to its control. The Contractor is responsible for any loss or 
damage resulting from its failure to do so other than loss or damage caused by ordinary wear and tear. 
11.2. Use of Property. The Contractor must use all Government Property solely for the purpose of the 
Contract and all Government Property remains the property of Canada. The Contractor must maintain 
adequate accounting records of all Government Property and, whenever feasible, mark it as being the 
property of Canada. 
11.3. Return of Property. The Contractor must return all Government Property, unless the Contractor 
installs or incorporates it in the Work. All scrap and all waste materials, articles or things that are 
Government Property must, remain the property of Canada and must be disposed of only as directed by 
Canada. 
11.4. Inventory of Property. At the time of completion of the Contract, and if requested by the 
Contracting Authority, the Contractor must provide Canada an inventory of all Government Property 
relating to the Contract. 
12. Copyright. 
12.1. Copyright. In this section, "Material" means anything the Contractor creates as part of the Work 
under the Contract or that the Contractor is to deliver under the Contract to Canada and in which 
copyright subsists. "Material" does not include anything created by the Contractor before the date of the 
Contract.  
a. Copyright in Material. Copyright in the Material belongs to Canada and the Contractor must 
include the copyright symbol and either of the following notice on the Material: © His Majesty 
the King in right of Canada (2026) or © Sa Majesté le Roi du chef du Canada (2026). 
b. No Use of Material. The Contractor must not use, copy, divulge, or publish any Material except 
as is necessary to perform the Contract. 
c. 
Moral Rights. The Contractor must provide Canada, at its request, with a written permanent 
waiver of moral rights, in a form acceptable to Canada, from every author that contributed to 
the Material. The Contractor permanently waives its moral rights in any Material of which it is 
the author. 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 22 of 57 
  
13. Use and Translation of Written Material. 
13.1. Translation of documentation. The Contractor agrees that Canada may translate in the other 
official language any documentation delivered to Canada by the Contractor that does not belong to 
Canada under the section entitled Copyright. The Contractor acknowledges that Canada owns the 
translation and that it is under no obligation to provide any translation to the Contractor. Canada agrees 
that any translation must include any copyright notice and any proprietary right notice that was part of 
the original. Canada acknowledges that the Contractor is not responsible for any technical errors or 
other problems that may arise as a result of the translation. 
14. Confidentiality. 
14.1. Confidentiality Obligations.  
a. Contractor's Obligations. The Contractor must keep confidential all information provided to 
the Contractor by or on behalf of Canada in connection with the Work. This includes any 
information that is confidential or proprietary to third parties, and all information conceived, 
developed or produced by the Contractor as part of the Work when copyright or any other 
intellectual property rights in such information belongs to Canada under the Contract. The 
Contractor must not disclose any such information without the written permission of Canada. 
The Contractor may disclose to a subcontractor any information necessary to perform a 
subcontract as long as the subcontractor agrees to keep the information confidential and the 
subcontractor only uses the information to perform a subcontract. 
b. Canada's Obligations. Subject to the Access to Information Act and to any right of Canada 
under the Contract to release or disclose, Canada agrees not to release or disclose outside the 
Government of Canada any information delivered to Canada under the Contract that is 
proprietary to the Contractor or a subcontractor. 
14.2. Use Solely for the Purpose. The Contractor agrees to use any information provided to the 
Contractor by or on behalf of Canada only for the purpose of the Contract. The Contractor acknowledges 
that all this information remains the property of Canada or the third party, as the case may be. 
14.3. Return of Information. The Contractor must deliver to Canada any such information, together with 
every copy, draft, working paper, and note that contains such information, upon completion or 
termination of the Contract or at such earlier time as Canada may require. 
14.4. Non-Confidential Information. The obligations of the Parties set out in this section do not apply to 
any information if the information:  
a. is publicly available from a source other than the other Party; or 
b. is or becomes known to a Party from a source other than the other Party, except any source 
that is known to be under an obligation to the other Party not to disclose the information; or 
c. 
is developed by a Party without the use of the information of the other Party. 
14.5. Marking. Wherever possible, the Contractor must mark or identify any proprietary information 
delivered to Canada under the Contract as "Property of [Name of contractor inserted at contract 
award]”, permitted Government uses defined under Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and 
Development contract number [inserted at contract award]. Canada will not be liable for any 
unauthorized use or disclosure of information that could have been so marked or identified and was not. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 23 of 57 
  
15. Data Protection and Privacy. 
15.1. Protected Information.  
a. Standard of Care. If the Contract, the Work, or any confidential information is identified as 
TOP SECRET, SECRET, CONFIDENTIAL, PROTECTED, COSMIC TOP SECRET, NATO SECRET, NATO 
CONFIDENTIAL, or NATO RESTRICTED by Canada, the Contractor must at all times take all 
measures reasonably necessary for the safeguarding of the material so identified, including 
those set out in the PWGSC Contract Security Manual and its supplements and any other 
instructions issued by Canada. 
b. Inspection. If the Contract, the Work, or any information is identified as TOP SECRET, SECRET, 
CONFIDENTIAL, PROTECTED, COSMIC TOP SECRET, NATO SECRET, NATO CONFIDENTIAL, or 
NATO RESTRICTED by Canada, representatives of Canada are entitled to inspect the 
Contractor's premises and the premises of a subcontractor at any tier for security purposes at 
any time during the Contract Period. The Contractor must comply with, and ensure that any 
subcontractor complies with, all written instructions issued by Canada dealing with the 
material so identified, including any requirement that employees of the Contractor or of any 
subcontractor execute and deliver declarations relating to reliability screenings, security 
clearances and other procedures. 
16. Access to Information. 
16.1. Access to Information. Records created by the Contractor, and under the control of Canada, are 
subject to the Access to Information Act. The Contractor acknowledges the responsibilities of Canada 
under the Access to Information Act and must, to the extent possible, assist Canada in discharging these 
responsibilities. Furthermore, the Contractor acknowledges that section 67.1 of the Access to 
Information Act provides that any person, who destroys, alters, falsifies or conceals a record, or directs 
anyone to do so, with the intent of obstructing the right of access that is provided by the Access to 
Information Act is guilty of an offence and is liable to imprisonment or a fine, or both. 
17. Accounts and Audit. 
17.1. Accounts and Records.  
a. Requirement to Keep Records. The Contractor must maintain complete and accurate records 
of the estimated and actual cost of the Work, to enable Canada to determine whether the 
Contractor has performed the Work, the price charged for the Work is in accordance with the 
Contract terms and Canada has achieved best value. 
b. Types of Records. Such records include all tender calls, quotations, contracts, correspondence, 
source documents for accounting entries such as Excel or other spread sheets in numeric and 
machine readable form (not PDF copies), books and ledgers of initial accounting entries, work 
sheets, spreadsheets and other documentation supporting cost allocations, computations, 
reconciliations and assumptions made by the Contractor in relation to the Contract. The 
Contractor can only use copies if originals are unavailable due to unusual circumstances, such 
as fire, flood or theft. 
c. 
Accounting System. The Contractor must establish and maintain an accounting system that 
enables Canada to readily identify these records. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 24 of 57 
  
d. Availability of Records. The Contractor must make these records available on request, for 
examination by Canada, or by Canada’s representatives during normal business hours at the 
Contractor’s office or place of business. If no such location is available, then the Contractor 
must make financial records, with the supporting or underlying documents and records, 
available for examination at a time and location that is convenient for Canada. 
e. Retention of Records. The Contractor must maintain such records, and Canada and its 
authorized representatives may examine such records, at all times during the period of this 
Contract and until the later of seven years after final payment and the settlement of all 
outstanding claims and disputes. Should an examination reveal any overpayments by Canada, 
these will be claimed by Canada and immediately repaid by the Contractor. 
f. 
Review by Canada. Canada and its authorized representatives may examine, and make copies 
of, or extract from, all such records in whatever form they may be kept, relating to or 
pertaining to this Contract, including but not limited to those kept by the Contractor, its 
employees, agents, successors, and subcontractors. 
g. Full Compliance. The Contractor must ensure that all subcontractors and affiliates comply with 
the requirements of this clause. 
17.2. Time Records. If the Contract includes payment for time spent by the Contractor, its employees, 
representatives, agents or subcontractors performing the Work, the Contractor must keep a record of 
the actual time spent each day by each individual performing any part of the Work. 
18. Insurance. 
18.1. Insurance Requirements. The Contractor is responsible for deciding if insurance coverage is 
necessary to fulfill its obligations under the Contract and to ensure compliance with any applicable law. 
Any insurance acquired or maintained by the Contractor is at the Contractor’s expense and for its own 
benefit and protection. It does not release the Contractor from or reduce its liability under the Contract. 
19. Certifications and Additional Information. 
19.1. Compliance with Certifications. Unless specified otherwise, the Contractor will be in default if it 
does not continuously comply with the certifications it provided in its offer or before contract award or if 
the Contractor does not provide evidence about its compliance when requested by the Contracting 
Authority. Canada may verify the Contractor's certifications throughout the Contract Period. 
19.2. Compliance with Laws. The Contractor must comply with all laws applicable to the performance of 
the Contract. The Contractor must provide evidence of compliance with such laws to Canada at such 
times as Canada may reasonably request. 
19.3. Compliance with Code of Conduct. The Contractor must comply with the Code of Conduct for 
Procurement. 
19.4. Contingency Fees. The Contractor certifies and agrees that it has not paid and will not pay, directly 
or indirectly, any contingency fee for the solicitation, negotiation or obtaining of the Contract to any 
person (including, without limitation any individual who is required to file a return with the registrar 
pursuant to section 5 of the Lobbying Act), other than an employee of the Contractor acting in the 
normal course of the employee's duties. In this section:  

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 25 of 57 
  
a. "contingency fee" means any payment or other compensation that depends or is calculated 
based on a degree of success in solicitating, negotiating or obtaining the Contract; and 
b. "person" included any individual who is required to file a return with the registrar pursuant to 
section 5 of the Lobbying Act 1985, c. 44 (4th Supplement). 
19.5. No Bribe. The Contractor certifies that it has not and will not offer, promise, give or pay any bribe, 
gift, benefit, or other inducement directly or indirectly to any official or employee of Canada or to any 
member of their family, in order to influence the issuance or administration of the Contract. 
19.6. No Influence; No Financial Interest. The Contractor must not influence, seek to influence, or 
otherwise take part in any decision of Canada that might further the Contractor's own interests. The 
Contractor must have no financial interest in the business of any third party that causes or would appear 
to cause a conflict of interest in connection with the performance of the Work. The Contractor must 
immediately declare any such financial interest to the Contracting Authority. 
19.7. No Conflict. The Contractor warrants that, to the best of its knowledge after making diligent 
inquiry, no conflict exists or is likely to arise in its performance of the Contract. If the Contractor becomes 
aware of any matter that causes or is likely to cause such a conflict, the Contractor must immediately 
disclose it to the Contracting Authority. If the Contracting Authority is of the reasonable opinion that 
such a conflict exists, it may either (i) require the Contractor to take steps to deal with the conflict or (ii) 
terminate the Contract for default. In this section, “conflict” means any matter, circumstance, interest, or 
activity affecting the Contractor, its personnel, or its subcontractors, that may impair or may appear to 
impair its ability to perform the Work diligently and independently. 
19.8. Ethics Codes for Public Service. The Contractor acknowledges that individuals who are subject to 
the provisions of the Conflict of interest Act, the Conflict of interest Code for Members of the House of 
Commons, the Values and Ethics Code for the Public Service or all other codes of values and ethics 
applicable within specific organizations cannot derive any direct or indirect benefit from the Contract. 
19.9. Ineligibility and Suspension Policy Provisions. The Contractor must comply with the provisions of 
the Ineligibility and Suspension Policy and Directives, found on Public Works and Government Services 
Canada’s website at Ineligibility and Suspension Policy. 
19.10. Harassment in the Workplace.  
a. The Contractor acknowledges the responsibility of Canada to ensure, for its employees, a 
healthy work environment, free of harassment. A copy of the Directive on the Prevention and 
Resolution of Workplace Harassment and Violence, which also applies to the Contractor, is 
available on the Treasury Board Web site. 
b. The Contractor must not, either as an individual, or as a corporate or unincorporated entity, 
through its employees or subcontractors, harass, abuse, threaten, discriminate against or 
intimidate any employee, contractor or other individual employed by, or under contract with 
Canada. Canada will advise the Contractor in writing of any complaint and the Contractor will 
have the right to respond in writing. Upon receipt of the Contractor's response, the 
Contracting Authority will, at its entire discretion, make a determination regarding the validity 
of the complaint and decide on any action required. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 26 of 57 
  
19.11. Invoice Submittal Certification. By submitting an invoice, the Contractor certifies that the invoice 
is consistent with the Work delivered and is in accordance with the Contract. 
20. Proactive Disclosure of Contracts with Former Public Servants. 
20.1. Proactive Disclosure of Contracts with Former Public Servants. By providing information on its 
status, with respect to being a former public servant in receipt of a Public Service Superannuation Act 
(PSSA) pension, the Offeror has agreed that this information will be reported on departmental websites 
as part of the published proactive disclosure reports, in accordance with Contracting Policy Notice: 2019-
01 of the Treasury Board Secretariat of Canada. 
21. International Sanctions. 
21.1. Sanctions Limitations. Canada cannot accept delivery of goods or services that originate, directly 
or indirectly, from the countries or persons subject to economic sanctions. 
21.2. Contractor Obligations.  
a. The Contractor must:  
i. not supply to the Government of Canada any goods or services that are subject to 
economic sanctions, 
ii. comply with changes to the regulations imposed during the Contract Period, and 
iii. immediately advise Canada if it is unable to perform the Work because of the imposition of 
economic sanctions against a country or person or the addition of a good or service to the 
list of sanctioned goods or services. 
b. If the Parties cannot agree on a workaround plan, Canada will terminate the Contract for 
convenience. 
22.  Termination and Suspension. 
22.1. Termination for Convenience.  
a. Right to Terminate. Canada may terminate the Contract for convenience in whole or in part by 
giving written notice to the Contractor. The termination for convenience will take effect 
immediately or at the time specified in the termination notice. 
b. Effect of Termination. Upon termination for convenience of the Contract  
i. the Contractor must comply with the requirements of the termination notice; or 
ii. if Canada terminates the Contract in part only, the Contractor must proceed to complete 
any part of the Work that is not part of the termination notice. 
c. 
Payments. Canada will pay the Contractor  
i. according to the Basis of Payment, for any part of the Work delivered, inspected, and 
accepted whether completed before, or after the termination in accordance with the 
Contract; 
ii. Costs incurred by the Contractor plus a fair and reasonable profit thereon as determined by 
Canada in accordance with the profit provisions found in PWGSC Supply Manual section 
10.65 Calculation of profit on negotiated contracts, for any part of the Work commenced, 
but not completed, before the date of the termination notice; and 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 27 of 57 
  
iii. Costs incidental to the termination of the Work incurred by the Contractor but not 
including the cost of severance payments or damages to employees whose services are no 
longer required, except wages that the Contractor is obligated by statute to pay. 
d. Maximum Payment. The total of the amounts, which Canada may pay the Contractor under 
this section, together with any amounts paid, due or becoming due to the Contractor must not 
exceed the Contract Price. Canada may reduce the payment in respect of any part of the Work, 
if upon inspection, it does not meet the requirements of the Contract. 
e. Acknowledgments.  
i. Claims. The Contractor will have no claim for damages, compensation, loss of profit, 
interest, allowance arising out of any termination notice given by Canada under this section 
except to the extent that this section expressly provides; 
ii. Anticipated Profits. The Contractor agrees that it is not entitled to any anticipated profit on 
any part of the Contract terminated; and 
iii. Repayments. The Contractor agrees to repay immediately to Canada the portion of any 
advance payment that is unliquidated at the date of the termination. 
22.2. Termination on Default.  
a. Right to Terminate. Canada may, by giving written notice to the Contractor, terminate the 
Contract or any part of the Contract if the Contractor  
i. fails to perform any term of the Contract, or 
ii. becomes bankrupt, makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or if a receiver is 
appointed under a debt instrument or a receiving order is made against the Contractor, or 
an order is made or a resolution passed for the winding-up of the Contractor. 
b. Effect of Termination.  
i. For (a)(i) above, the termination will take effect immediately or at the expiration of a cure 
period specified in the notice, if the Contractor has not cured the default to the satisfaction 
of the Contracting Authority within that cure period. 
ii. For (a)(ii) above, the termination will take effect immediately. 
iii. No Further Payment. If Canada terminates the Contract for default, the Contractor will 
have no claim for further payment except as provided in this section. 
iv. Payment of Outstanding Amounts. The Contractor must immediately pay Canada any 
amounts paid by Canada, including milestone payments, and all losses and damages 
suffered by Canada because of the default or occurrence upon which the notice was based, 
including any increase in the cost incurred by Canada in procuring the Work from another 
source. 
v. Refund of Advance Payments. The Contractor agrees to repay immediately to Canada the 
portion of any advance payment that is unliquidated at the date of the termination. 
vi. Maximum Payment. The total amount paid by Canada under the Contract to the date of 
the termination and any amount payable under this subsection must not exceed the 
Contract Price. 
vii. Completed Parts of the Work. Upon termination of the Contract for default, the 
Contracting Authority may require the Contractor to deliver to Canada, in the manner and 
to the extent directed by the Contracting Authority, any completed parts of the Work, not 
delivered and accepted before the termination and anything the Contractor has acquired or 
produced specifically to perform the Contract. In such a case, subject to the deduction of 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 28 of 57 
  
any claim that Canada may have against the Contractor arising under the Contract or out of 
the termination, Canada will pay or credit to the Contractor:  
1. 
the value, of all completed parts of the Work delivered to and accepted by Canada, 
based on the Contract Price, including the proportionate part of the Contractor's 
profit or fee included in the Contract Price; and 
2. 
the cost to the Contractor that Canada considers reasonable in respect of anything 
else delivered to and accepted by Canada. 
c. 
Termination in Error. If the Contract is terminated for default, but it is later determined that 
grounds did not exist for a termination for default, the notice will be considered a notice of 
termination for convenience. 
22.3. Suspension of the Work. 
a. Right to Suspend Work. The Contractor must not suspend or stop work unless ordered by 
Canada. Canada may, by written notice, at any time, order the Contractor to suspend or stop 
the Work or part of the Work under the Contract for a period of up to 180 days. The 
Contractor must immediately comply with any such order in a way that minimizes the cost of 
doing so. While such an order is in effect, the Contractor must not limit access to any part of 
the Work without first obtaining the written consent of the Contracting Authority. Within this 
period, the Contracting Authority must either cancel the order or terminate the Contract in 
accordance with the Termination terms of the Contract. 
b. Effect of Suspension. When Canada suspends the Work, Canada will pay the Contractor its 
additional costs incurred because of the suspension plus a fair and reasonable profit as 
determined by Canada in accordance with the Termination for Convenience clause of the 
Contract, unless the Contracting Authority terminates the Contract for default or the 
Contractor abandons the Contract. 
c. 
Resumption of Work. When Canada cancels a suspension, the Contractor must resume work 
in accordance with the Contract as soon as practicable. If the suspension has affected the 
Contractor's ability to meet any delivery date under the Contract, the date for performing the 
part of the Work affected by the suspension will be extended for a period equal to the period 
of suspension plus a period, if any, that in the opinion of the Contracting Authority, following 
consultation with the Contractor, is necessary for the Contractor to resume the Work. Canada 
will make any equitable adjustments as necessary to any affected conditions of the Contract. 
23. Remedies and Liabilities. 
23.1. Liability. 
a. Exclusive Provision. The Parties agree that no limitation of liability or indemnity provision 
applies to the Contract unless it is specifically incorporated in full text. 
b. Contractor Liability. The Contractor is liable for any damage caused by the Contractor, its 
employees, subcontractors, or agents to Canada or any third party. 
c. 
Canada Liability. Canada is liable for any damage caused by Canada, its employees, or agents 
to the Contractor or any third party. 
d. Damages. Damage includes any injury to persons (including injury resulting in death) or loss of 
or damage to property (including real property) caused as a result of or during the 
performance of the Contract. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 29 of 57 
  
24. Intellectual Property Infringement and Royalties. 
24.1. Third-Party Claims.  
a. Notification. The Parties agree to immediately notify the other Party in the event a third party 
makes a claim against Canada or the Contractor concerning intellectual property infringement 
or royalties related to the Work. 
b. Defense. Canada must control the defense of third-party intellectual property infringement or 
royalty claims or request that the Contractor defend Canada against the claim. In either case, 
the Contractor agrees to participate fully in the defence and any settlement negotiations and 
to pay all costs, damages and legal costs incurred or payable because of the claim, including 
the amount of any settlement. 
c. 
Settlement. The Parties agree not to settle any claim unless the other Party first approves the 
settlement in writing. 
d. Exceptions. The Contractor has no obligation regarding claims only made because:  
i. Canada modified the Work or part of the Work without the Contractor's consent or used 
the Work or part of the Work without following a requirement of the Contract; or 
ii. Canada used the Work or part of the Work with a product that the Contractor did not 
supply under the Contract (unless that use is described in the Contract or the 
manufacturer's specifications or other documentation); or 
iii. the Contractor used equipment, drawings, Specifications or other information supplied to 
the Contractor by Canada (or by someone authorized by Canada); or 
iv. the Contractor used a specific item of equipment or software that it obtained because of 
specific instructions from the Contracting Authority; however, this exception only applies if 
the Contractor has included the following language in its own contract with the supplier of 
that equipment or software: "(Name of Supplier) acknowledges that the purchased items 
will be used by the Government of Canada. If a third party claims that equipment or 
software supplied under the contract infringes any intellectual property right, (Name of 
Supplier), if requested to do so by either (Name of Contractor) or Canada, will defend both 
(Name of Contractor) and Canada against that claim at its own expense and will pay all 
costs, damages and legal fees payable as a result of that infringement." Obtaining this 
protection from the supplier is the Contractor's responsibility and, if the Contractor does 
not do so, it will be responsible to Canada for the claim. 
24.2. Contractor Obligations.  
a. If anyone claims that, as a result of the Work, the Contractor or Canada is infringing its 
intellectual property rights, the Contractor must immediately do one of the following:  
i. take whatever steps are necessary to allow Canada to continue to use the allegedly 
infringing part of the Work; or 
ii. modify or replace the Work to avoid intellectual property infringement, while ensuring that 
the Work continues to meet all the requirements of the Contract; or 
iii. take back the Work and refund any part of the Contract Price that Canada has already paid. 
b. If the Contractor determines that none of these alternatives can reasonably be achieved, or if 
the Contractor fails to take any of these steps within a reasonable amount of time, Canada 
may choose either to require the Contractor to do (iii), or to take whatever steps are necessary 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 30 of 57 
  
to acquire the rights to use the allegedly infringing part(s) of the Work itself, in which case the 
Contractor must reimburse Canada for all the costs it incurs to do so. 
24.3. Damages Caused by Contractor. If Canada is required because of joint and several liability, to pay a 
third party in respect of damages caused by the Contractor, the Contractor must reimburse Canada any 
amount determined by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction or by arbitration to be the 
Contractor's portion of the damages to the third party. 
25. General Provisions. 
25.1. Status of Contractor. The Contractor is an independent contractor engaged by Canada to perform 
the Work. The Contract does not create a partnership, a joint venture or an agency between Canada and 
the other Party or Parties. The Contractor must not represent itself as an agent or representative of 
Canada to anyone. Neither the Contractor nor any of its personnel are an employee or agent of Canada. 
The Contractor is responsible for all deductions and remittances required by law in relation to its 
employees. 
25.2. Entire Agreement. The Contract and the offer document are the entire agreement between the 
Parties and supersedes all previous negotiations, communications and agreements. 
25.3. Amendment.  
a. Amendments to the Contract must be in writing and signed by the Parties. 
b. While the Contractor may discuss any proposed modifications to the Work with other 
representatives of Canada, Canada will not be responsible for the cost of any modification 
unless it has been incorporated into the Contract in writing and signed by the Parties. 
25.4. Counterparts. The Parties may execute the Contract in several counterparts, each of which is an 
original and all of which constitute one single agreement between the Parties. 
25.5. Assignment.  
a. The Contractor may only assign this agreement if  
i. Canada agrees to the assignment in writing; and 
ii. the Contractor remains responsible for the assignee’s performance. 
b. The assignment will be effective upon execution of an assignment agreement signed by the 
Parties and the assignee. 
25.6. Successors and Assigns. The Contract is to the benefit of and binds the successors and permitted 
assignees of Canada and of the Contractor. 
25.7. Notice. All notices or other communications required or permitted by the Contract must be in 
writing and delivered to the Contracting Authority for Canada and the Contractor’s Representative for 
the Contractor. Any notice is effective on the day received. 
25.8. Applicable Laws. The laws in force in Ontario, Canada will govern the Contract and the relations 
between the Parties and be used to interpret the Contract. The Contractor must comply with all laws 
applicable to the performance of the Contract and provide evidence of compliance with those laws to 
Canada if requested by the Contracting Authority. 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 31 of 57 
  
25.9. Dispute Resolution.  
a. Open Communication Between Parties. The Parties agree to maintain open and honest 
communication about the Work during and after the period of the Contract. 
b. Parties' Cooperation. The Parties agree to consult and co-operate with each other to further 
the objectives of the Contract. They will promptly notify each other of, and attempt to resolve, 
any problems or differences that may arise. 
c. 
Alternative Dispute Resolution. If the Parties cannot resolve a dispute through consultation 
and cooperation, they will consult a neutral third party that offers alternative dispute 
resolution services. 
d. Dispute Resolution Options. Parties can find alternative dispute resolution options on 
Canada’s Buy and Sell website under the heading "Dispute Resolution". 
25.10. Powers of Canada. All rights, remedies, powers and discretions granted or acquired by Canada 
under the Contract or by law are cumulative, not exclusive. 
25.11. Time of the Essence. It is essential that the Contractor deliver or perform the Work within or at 
the time stated in the Contract. 
25.12. Excusable Delay.  
a. Definition of Excusable Delay. A delay in the performance by the Contractor or Canada of any 
obligation under the Contract that is caused by an event that  
i. is beyond the reasonable control of the party, 
ii. could not reasonably have been foreseen, 
iii. could not reasonably have been prevented by means reasonably available to the party, and 
iv. occurred without the fault or neglect of the party, is an "Excusable Delay" if the party 
advises the other party's Contracting Authority or the Contractor's Representative of the 
occurrence of the delay or of the likelihood of the delay as soon as the party becomes 
aware of it. The party must also advise the other, within 15 Business Days, of all the 
circumstances relating to the delay and provide to the Contracting Authority or 
Contractor's Representative for approval a clear workaround plan explaining in detail the 
steps that the Contractor proposes to take in order to minimize the impact of the event 
causing the delay. 
b. Postponement of Delivery. Either party will postpone for a reasonable time any delivery date 
or another date directly affected by an Excusable Delay. Any postponement will not exceed the 
duration of the Excusable Delay. 
c. 
Right to Terminate. However, if an Excusable Delay has continued for 30 days or more, the 
party may terminate the Contract on written notice to the other party. In such a case, the 
Parties agree that neither will make any claim against the other for damages, costs, expected 
profits or any other loss arising out of the termination or the event that contributed to the 
Excusable Delay. The Contractor agrees to repay immediately to Canada the portion of any 
advance payment that is unliquidated at the date of the termination. 
d. Liability for Costs Incurred. Unless Canada has caused the delay by failing to meet an 
obligation under the Contract, Canada will not be responsible for any costs incurred by the 
Contractor or any of its subcontractors or agents because of an Excusable Delay. 
e. Delivery of Completed Work. If Canada terminates the Contract under this section, the 
Contracting Authority may require the Contractor to deliver to Canada, in the manner and to 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 32 of 57 
  
the extent directed by the Contracting Authority, any completed parts of the Work not 
delivered and accepted before the termination and anything that the Contractor has acquired 
or produced specifically to perform the Contract. Canada will pay the Contractor:  
i. the value, of all completed parts of the Work delivered to and accepted by Canada, based 
on the Contract Price, including the proportionate part of the Contractor's profit or fee 
included in the Contract Price; and 
ii. the Cost to the Contractor that Canada considers reasonable in respect of anything else 
delivered to and accepted by Canada. 
f. 
Total Payments. The total amount paid by Canada under the Contract to the date of 
termination and any amounts payable under this subsection must not exceed the Contract 
Price.  
25.13. Waiver.  
a. A waiver will only be valid if made in writing by the affected Party’s representative. A Party's 
failure to enforce any rights under the Contract will be neither treated nor interpreted as a 
waiver of that Party's rights. 
b. The waiver by a Party of a breach of any condition of the Contract will not be treated or 
interpreted as a waiver of any subsequent breach and therefore will not prevent that Party 
from enforcing of that term or condition in the case of a subsequent breach. 
25.14. Severability. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of the Contract 
unenforceable, illegal, or invalid, the remainder of the Contract remains in force. 
25.15. Priority of Documents. If there is a conflict between the wording of any documents that appear 
on the list, the wording of the document that first appears on the list has priority over the wording of 
any document that subsequently appears on the list:  
a. these Articles of Agreement; 
b. Annex Contract Definitions; 
c. 
Annex Solicitation of Offers Definitions; 
d. Annex Statement of Work; 
e. Annex Basis of Payment; 
f. 
Annex Security Requirements Check List  
g. the Contractor's offer dated yyyy-mm-dd. (inserted at Contract award) 
25.16. Survival. All the Parties' obligations of confidentiality, any representations and warranties set out 
in the Contract as well as the provisions, which by their nature might reasonably be expected to survive, 
will survive the expiry or termination of the Contract. 
26. Authorities. 
26.1. Contracting Authority.  
a. The Contracting Authority for the Contract is: (inserted at Contract award) 
Tel.: 
E-mail: 
Address: 
Department Name: Foreign Affairs and Trade Development Canada 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 33 of 57 
  
b. The Contracting Authority is responsible for the management of the Contract and must 
authorize in writing any changes to the Contract. The Contractor must not perform work in 
excess of or outside the scope of the Contract based on verbal or written requests or 
instructions from anybody other than the Contracting Authority. 
26.2. Project Authority.  
a. The Project Authority for the Contract is: (inserted at Contract award) 
Tel: 
E-mail: 
Address: 
Department Name: Foreign Affairs and Trade Development Canada 
b. The Work is for a department or agency. The Project Authority represents that department or 
agency. The Project Authority is responsible for all matters concerning the technical content of 
the Work under the Contract. The Contractor may discuss technical matters with the Project 
Authority, however the Project Authority has no authority to authorize changes to the scope 
of the Work. Only the Contracting Authority can issue a contract amendment to make changes 
to the scope of the Work. 
26.3. Contractor's Representative.  
a. The Contractor's Representative for the Contract is: (inserted at Contract award) 
Tel: 
E-mail: 
Address: 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 34 of 57 
  
Annex - Solicitation of Offers - Definitions 
In this solicitation of offers, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms have the 
following meanings. 
"Articles of Agreement" means the clauses and conditions incorporated in full text to form the body of 
the Contract; it does not include the annexes, the Contractor's offer or any other document; 
“Canadian Good” means a good that is wholly manufactured or originated in Canada. Canada may also 
consider a product that contains imported components to be a Canadian Good for the purpose of the 
Canadian Content Policy when it has undergone sufficient change in Canada in a manner that satisfies 
the definition specified under the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) Rules of Origin. For 
the purposes of this determination, the reference in the CUSMA Rules of Origin to "territory of one or 
more of the Parties" is replaced with "Canada". (Consult Section 3.130 and Annex 3.6 of the Supply 
Manual for further information.) 
“Canadian Service” means a service provided by an individual based in Canada. If a requirement consists 
of only one service provided by two or more individuals, Canada will consider the service to be a 
Canadian Service if a minimum of 80 percent of the total offer price for the service is provided by 
individuals based in Canada. 
"Variety of Goods" means that if a requirement consists of more than one good, Canada will apply one 
of the following methods: 
a. Aggregate evaluation: No less than 80 percent of the total offer price must consist of Canadian Goods, 
or 
b. Item-by-item evaluation: In some cases, Canada may conduct the offer evaluation on an item-by-item 
basis and enter into contracts with more than one Offeror. In such a case, Canada will ask the Offeror to 
identify separately each item that meets the definition of Canadian Goods. 
"Variety of Services" means that if a requirement consists of more than one service, a minimum of 80 
percent of the total offer price must be provided by individuals based in Canada. 
"Mix of Goods and Services" means that if a requirement consists of a mix of goods and services, no less 
than 80 percent of the total offer price must consist of Canadian Goods and Canadian Services. 
For more information on how to determine the Canadian Content for a mix of goods, a mix of services or 
a mix of goods and services, consult Annex 3.6, Example 2, of the Supply Manual. 
"Other Canadian Goods and Services" means Canada may consider textiles to be Canadian Goods 
according to a modified rule of origin, copies of which are available from the Clothing and Textiles 
Division, Commercial and Consumer Products Directorate. 
“Client" means the department or agency for which the Work is performed; 
"Canada’s Representative" or “Contracting Authority” means the person designated by that title in the 
Contract, or by notice to the Contractor, to act as Canada’s agent and representative for the purposes of 
this Contract; 
“Non-Responsive” means instances where the offer has not fulfilled the requirements and applied the 
instructions of the solicitation of offers. For example, an offer that is submitted past the Closing Date and 
Time is non-responsive.  
“Contract” means the contract made as a result of the solicitation of offers process.  

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 35 of 57 
  
"Contractor" means the person, entity or entities named in the Contract to supply goods, services, or 
both to Canada; 
"Contract Price" means the amount stated in the Contract to be payable to the Contractor for the Work, 
exclusive of Applicable Taxes; 
"Cost" means cost determined according to Contract Cost Principles 1031-2 as revised to the date of the 
solicitation of offers or, if there was no solicitation of offers, the date of the Contract; 
“Date of payment” means the date of the negotiable instrument drawn, or electronic transfers made by 
the Receiver General for Canada to pay any amount under the Contract; 
“Excluded Material” refers to packaging tape - environmentally preferable material alternatives for 
packaging tape are not widely available. As a result, packaging tape is excluded from the environmentally 
preferable packaging specifications until the market has progressed and studies become available to 
determine otherwise; 
“Former Public Servant” is any former member of a department as defined in the Financial 
Administration Act, R.S., 1985, c. F-11, a former member of the Canadian Armed Forces or a former 
member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. A former public servant may be: 
(a) an individual; 
(b) an individual who has incorporated; 
(c) a partnership made of former public servants; or 
(d) a sole proprietorship or entity where the affected individual has a controlling or major interest in the 
entity; 
“Joint Venture” means an association of two or more Parties who combine their money, property, 
knowledge, expertise or other resources in a single joint business enterprise, sometimes referred as a 
consortium, to offer together on a requirement; 
“Lump Sum Payment” means the payment which has been made to facilitate the transition to 
retirement or to other employment as a result of the implementation of various programs to reduce the 
size of the Public Service. The lump sum payment period does not include the period of severance pay, 
which is measured in a like manner; 
“Net-Zero Challenge or Equivalent” means the following accepted initiatives are deemed equivalents to 
the Net-Zero Challenge, ‘United Nations Race to Zero’ or ‘Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTI)’ or 
‘Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)’ or ‘International Organization for Standardization (ISO) – ISO 14064-
1:2018’ 
“Offeror” means the person or entity (or, in the case of a Joint Venture, the persons or entities) 
submitting an offer. An Offeror can be a sole proprietorship, corporation, a partnership, a Joint Venture 
or a natural person. It does not include the parent, subsidiaries or other affiliates of the Offeror, or its 
subcontractors; 
“Packaging” means product to be used for the containment, protection, handling, delivery, storage, 
transport and presentation of goods. (Source: ISO 21067-1:2016, Clause 2.1.1); 
"Party" means Canada, the Contractor, or any other signatory to the Contract, and "Parties" means all of 
them; 
“Pension” means a pension or annual allowance paid under the Public Service Superannuation Act 
(PSSA), R.S., 1985, c. P-36, and any increases paid pursuant to the Supplementary Retirement Benefits 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 36 of 57 
  
Act, R.S., 1985, c. S-24 as it affects the PSSA. It does not include pensions payable pursuant to the 
Canadian Forces Superannuation Act, R.S., 1985, c. C-17, the Defence Services Pension Continuation Act, 
1970, c. D-3, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Pension Continuation Act, 1970, c. R-10, and the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act, R.S., 1985, c. R-11, the Members of Parliament Retiring 
Allowances Act, R.S. 1985, c. M-5, and that portion of pension payable to the Canada Pension Plan Act, 
R.S., 1985, c. C-8; 
“Recyclable” means capable of being diverted from the waste stream through available processes and 
programs and can be collected, sorted, processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials or 
products. (Source: CAN/CSA-ISO 14021, Clause 7.7.1); 
“Recyclable packaging” means packaging or a packaging component is recyclable if its successful post 
consumer collection, sorting, and recycling is proven to work in practice and at scale. This means that 
there is an existing (collection, sorting and recycling) system in place that actually recycles the packaging 
and that covers significant and relevant geographical areas as measured by population size. (Source: 
adapted from the New Plastics Economy Global Commitment); 
“Non-Responsive” means instances where an offer has not responded to the requirement. For example, 
an offer that does not pass the technical evaluation is non-responsive.  
“Returnable (to the Contractor)” means there is an existing and functional program in place for the 
packaging to be returned to the Contractor to reuse, refill, or recycle at no additional cost to the client; 
“Reusable (by Canada)” means designed to be used multiple times for the same purpose without losing 
its original functionality, physical capability or quality. A characteristic of a product or packaging that has 
been conceived and designed to accomplish within its life cycle a certain number of trips, rotations or 
uses for the same purpose for which it was conceived. (Source: CAN/CSA-ISO 14021, Clause 7.12.1.1); 
"Security Deposit" means (a) a bill of exchange that is payable to the Receiver General for Canada and 
certified by an approved financial institution or drawn by an approved financial institution on itself; or 
(b) a government guaranteed bond; or (c) an irrevocable standby letter of credit, or (d) such other 
security as may be considered appropriate by the Contracting Authority and approved by Treasury 
Board; 
"Approved Financial Institution" means (a) any corporation or institution that is a member of the 
Canadian Payments Association (Payments Canada); (b) a corporation that accepts deposits that are 
insured by the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Régie de l'assurance-dépôts du Québec to 
the maximum permitted by law; (c) a credit union as defined in paragraph 137(6) of the Income Tax Act; 
(d) a corporation that accepts deposits from the public, if repayment of the deposits is guaranteed by a 
Canadian province or territory; or (e) the Canada Post Corporation; 
"Government-guaranteed Bond" means a bond of the Government of Canada or a bond unconditionally 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the Government of Canada that is: (a) payable to bearer; (b) 
accompanied by a duly executed instrument of transfer of the bond to the Receiver General for Canada 
in accordance with the Domestic Bonds of Canada Regulations; (c) registered in the name of the Receiver 
General for Canada; 
“Specialized packaging” means packaging can be considered “specialized” if the intended use of the 
packaging requires technical performance specifications with no environmentally preferable alternatives. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 37 of 57 
  
For example, when transporting hazardous materials, if there is a need for a specific density of materials, 
or if they must be temperature controlled; 
"Specifications" means the description of the essential, functional, or technical requirements of the 
Work in the Contract, including the procedures for determining whether the requirements have been 
met; 
"Work" means all the activities, services, goods, equipment, matters and things required to be done, 
delivered or performed by the Contractor under the Contract. 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 38 of 57 
  
Annex - Contract Definitions 
In the Contract, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms have the following meanings. 
"Applicable Taxes" means the Goods and Services Tax (GST), the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST), and any 
provincial tax, by law, payable by Canada. 
"Articles of Agreement" means the clauses and conditions incorporated in full text to form the body of 
the Contract; it does not include the annexes, the Contractor's offer or any other document. 
"Average Rate" means the simple arithmetic mean of the Bank Rates in effect at 4:00 p.m. Eastern Time 
each day during the calendar month immediately before the calendar month in which payment is made. 
"Bank Rate" means the rate of interest established from time to time by the Bank of Canada as the 
minimum rate at which the Bank of Canada makes short term advances to members of the Canadian 
Payments Association. 
"Canada", “His Majesty” or "the Government" means His Majesty the King in right of Canada as 
represented by the Minister of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development and any other 
person duly authorized to act on behalf of that minister or, if applicable, an appropriate minister to 
whom the Minister of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development has delegated his or 
her powers, duties or functions and any other person duly authorized to act on behalf of that minister. 
“Canadian Good” means a good that is wholly manufactured or originated in Canada. Canada may also 
consider a product that contains imported components to be a Canadian Good for the purpose of the 
Canadian Content Policy when it has undergone sufficient change in Canada in a manner that satisfies 
the definition specified under the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) Rules of Origin. For 
the purposes of this determination, the reference in the CUSMA Rules of Origin to "territory of one or 
more of the Parties" is replaced with "Canada". (Consult Section 3.130 and Annex 3.6 of the Supply 
Manual for further information.) 
“Canadian Service” means a service provided by an individual based in Canada. If a requirement consists 
of only one service provided by two or more individuals, Canada will consider the service to be a 
Canadian Service if a minimum of 80 percent of the total offer price for the service is provided by 
individuals based in Canada. 
"Variety of Goods" means that if a requirement consists of more than one good, Canada will apply one 
of the following methods: 
a. Aggregate evaluation: No less than 80 percent of the total offer price must consist of Canadian Goods, 
or 
b. Item-by-item evaluation: In some cases, Canada may conduct the offer evaluation on an item-by-item 
basis and enter into contracts with more than one Offeror. In such a case, Canada will ask the Offeror to 
identify separately each item that meets the definition of Canadian Goods. 
"Variety of Services" means that if a requirement consists of more than one service, a minimum of 80 
percent of the total offer price must be provided by individuals based in Canada. 
"Mix of Goods and Services" means that if a requirement consists of a mix of goods and services, no less 
than 80 percent of the total offer price must consist of Canadian Goods and Canadian Services. 
For more information on how to determine the Canadian Content for a mix of goods, a mix of services or 
a mix of goods and services, consult Annex 3.6, Example 2, of the Supply Manual. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 39 of 57 
  
"Other Canadian Goods and Services" means Canada may consider textiles to be Canadian Goods 
according to a modified rule of origin, copies of which are available from the Clothing and Textiles 
Division, Commercial and Consumer Products Directorate. 
"Contract" means the Articles of Agreement, the terms and conditions, annexes and any other 
document specified or referred to as forming part of the Contract, all as amended by agreement of the 
Parties from time to time. 
"Contractor" means the person, entity or entities named in the Contract to supply goods, services or 
both to Canada. 
"Contract Price" means the amount stated in the Contract to be payable to the Contractor for the Work, 
exclusive of Applicable Taxes. 
“Contract Period” means the entire period of time during which the Contractor is obliged to perform the 
Work, which includes initial Contract Period and the period during which the Contract is extended, if 
Canada chooses to exercise any options set out in the Contract. 
"Cost" means cost determined according to Contract Cost Principles 1031-2 as revised to the date of the 
solicitation of offers or, if there was no solicitation of offers, the date of the Contract. 
"Date of payment" means the date of the negotiable instrument drawn by the Receiver General for 
Canada to pay any amount under the Contract. 
“Excluded Material” refers to packaging tape - environmentally preferable material alternatives for 
packaging tape are not widely available. As a result, packaging tape is excluded from the environmentally 
preferable packaging specifications until the market has progressed and studies become available to 
determine otherwise. 
"Government Property" means anything supplied to the Contractor by or on behalf of Canada for the 
purposes of performing the Contract and anything acquired by the Contractor in any manner in 
connection with the Work, the cost of which is paid by Canada under the Contract. 
“Net-Zero Challenge or Equivalent” means the following accepted initiatives are deemed equivalents to 
the Net-Zero Challenge, ‘United Nations Race to Zero’ or ‘Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTI)’ or 
‘Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP)’ or ‘International Organization for Standardization (ISO) – ISO 14064-
1:2018’ 
"Overdue" means an amount that is unpaid on the first day following the day on which it is due and 
payable according to the Contract. 
“Packaging” means product to be used for the containment, protection, handling, delivery, storage, 
transport and presentation of goods. (Source: ISO 21067-1:2016, Clause 2.1.1). 
"Party" means Canada, the Contractor, or any other signatory to the Contract and "Parties" means all of 
them. 
“Recyclable” means capable of being diverted from the waste stream through available processes and 
programs and can be collected, sorted, processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials or 
products. (Source: CAN/CSA-ISO 14021, Clause 7.7.1). 
“Recyclable packaging” means packaging or a packaging component is recyclable if its successful post 
consumer collection, sorting, and recycling is proven to work in practice and at scale. This means that 
there is an existing (collection, sorting and recycling) system in place that actually recycles the packaging 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 40 of 57 
  
and that covers significant and relevant geographical areas as measured by population size. (Source: 
adapted from the New Plastics Economy Global Commitment). 
“Returnable (to the Contractor)” means there is an existing and functional program in place for the 
packaging to be returned to the Contractor to reuse, refill, or recycle at no additional cost to the client. 
“Reusable (by Canada)” means designed to be used multiple times for the same purpose without losing 
its original functionality, physical capability or quality. A characteristic of a product or packaging that has 
been conceived and designed to accomplish within its life cycle a certain number of trips, rotations or 
uses for the same purpose for which it was conceived. (Source: CAN/CSA-ISO 14021, Clause 7.12.1.1). 
"Security Deposit" means (a) a bill of exchange that is payable to the Receiver General for Canada and 
certified by an approved financial institution or drawn by an approved financial institution on itself; or 
(b) a government guaranteed bond; or (c) an irrevocable standby letter of credit, or (d) such other 
security as may be considered appropriate by the Contracting Authority and approved by Treasury 
Board. 
"Approved Financial Institution" means (a) any corporation or institution that is a member of the 
Canadian Payments Association (Payments Canada); (b) a corporation that accepts deposits that are 
insured by the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Régie de l'assurance-dépôts du Québec to 
the maximum permitted by law; (c) a credit union as defined in paragraph 137(6) of the Income Tax Act; 
(d) a corporation that accepts deposits from the public, if repayment of the deposits is guaranteed by a 
Canadian province or territory; or (e) the Canada Post Corporation. 
"Government-guaranteed Bond" means a bond of the Government of Canada or a bond unconditionally 
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the Government of Canada that is: (a) payable to bearer; (b) 
accompanied by a duly executed instrument of transfer of the bond to the Receiver General for Canada 
in accordance with the Domestic Bonds of Canada Regulations; (c) registered in the name of the Receiver 
General for Canada. 
“Specialized packaging” means packaging can be considered “specialized” if the intended use of the 
packaging requires technical performance specifications with no environmentally preferable alternatives. 
For example, when transporting hazardous materials, if there is a need for a specific density of materials, 
or if they must be temperature controlled. 
"Specifications" means the description of the essential, functional or technical requirements of the Work 
in the Contract, including the procedures for determining whether the requirements have been met. 
"Work" means all the activities, services, goods, equipment, matters and things that the Contractor is 
required to do, deliver or perform under the Contract. 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 41 of 57 
  
Annex – Statement of Work 
 
FDI Matchmaking at MSPO 2026 in Kielce, Poland from September 7-11, 2026 
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
TGP, Global Affairs Canada (GAC)'s Investment Promotion Division (legal name: Department of Foreign 
Affairs, Trade and Development Canada), plans to host a Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) promotion and 
outreach program at the International Defence Industry Exhibition (MSPO 2026), to be held in Kielce, 
Poland, from September 7 to 11, 2026, at the Targi Kielce exhibition centre. The purpose of the program 
will be to attract FDI into Canadian municipalities and provinces. 
  
The program will include a Canadian delegation composed of senior executives and investment attraction 
advisors from Economic Development Organizations (EDOs) in Canadian provinces, municipalities and 
cities, as well as senior investment officials from Canadian Embassies, High Commission, and Consulates 
located in cities across Europe.  
  
In this regard, TGP is seeking the services of a service provider specializing in the identification of 
investment prospects with strong expertise in the European defence and security market. The service 
provider will recruit targeted companies interested in establishing and expanding their operations in 
Canada, for a series of business-to-business (B2B) matchmaking meetings with the Canadian EDO 
delegates. The planned B2B meetings will take place throughout MSPO 2026 at the Canada Pavilion or 
companies’ booths, should they exhibit at the trade show.  
2. BACKGROUND 
The International Defence Industry Exhibition (MSPO) is Europe’s third-largest defence and security 
trade show, and the flagship defence event in Central and Eastern Europe. Participants are expected 
from across the region, NATO partner markets, and globally. Held annually, the 2026 edition is expected 
to be the largest yet featuring: 
• 
more than 40,000 visitors  
• 
more than 900 exhibitors  
• 
more than 60 official delegations 
• 
2 new exhibition halls 
 
In 2026, Canada will be the lead nation, offering: 
• 
enhanced visibility and space for exhibiting Canadian companies to showcase their solutions  
• 
increased access to decision makers and buyers for participating Canadian companies and 
partners 
 
TGP’s FDI Matchmaking program at MSPO builds on the lead nation activities organized by GAC, 
extending FDI-specific programming to participating Canadian municipalities and provinces (referred to 
hereafter as EDOs).  

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 42 of 57 
  
Given the importance of the defence and security industries and Canada's strategy to build capacity in 
these sectors, MSPO 2026 provides an ideal platform for investor outreach aimed at raising Canada's 
profile as a destination of choice for business and investment and to highlight Canada's competitive 
advantages to potential investors.  
 
3. OBJECTIVES  
TGP is seeking the services of a lead generator (the "Contractor") with substantial expertise and contacts 
in the European defence and security ecosystem to recruit qualified companies to participate in business 
meetings with members of the Canadian delegation and if applicable, encourage them to attend 
networking events during MSPO 2026. B2B meetings with companies based outside Europe are welcome, 
should the firms have the capacity and intention to invest in Canada.   
  
The Contractor will be responsible for facilitating lead generation and matchmaking activities, focusing on 
all aspects of coordinating and scheduling B2B meetings for the Canadian delegation with high-potential 
companies in the defence and security industries at MSPO 2026.  
   
TGP will benefit from the in-depth market knowledge and experience of the local contractor, based on 
effective support and research.  
  
• 
Knowledge: The Contractor has in-house knowledge of the European defence and security 
markets, and experience in implementing tactical B2B investor matchmaking programs for other 
investment promotion agencies.   
• 
Network: The Contractor has a strong network of local resources and maintains close 
relationships with companies and organizations from multiple sectors and industries in 
European markets. The Contractor maintains an exceptionally strong network within the 
European defence & security markets. An established network of global defence and security 
contacts shall be considered an asset.    
• 
Flexibility: During the B2B recruitment process, the Contractor is able to provide advice and 
recommendations on how and when TGP should adapt to any changing situation, to ensure that 
contract objectives are met.   
• 
Efficiency and communication: The work will be carried out by experienced in-house 
consultants. We require at least two trained full-time consultants with excellent ability to work, 
speak and write in English to support the program. Proficiency in French and Polish is 
considered an asset. 
 
Through this FDI matchmaking program, foreign business leaders will be connected to Canada’s vibrant 
defence and security ecosystem, thus fostering new ventures, generating jobs, and driving economic 
growth. 
 
4. SCOPE OF WORK  
4.1 B2B Meetings  
The Contractor will recruit targeted and qualified company prospects and coordinate the scheduling of 
B2B meetings between these targeted companies and members of the Canadian delegation. Meetings will 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 43 of 57 
  
take place throughout MSPO 2026, either at the Canada pavilion or at the booths of companies exhibiting 
at the show.    
These qualified leads, which will be drawn primarily from across the European defence and security 
ecosystem (but possibly from outside of Europe), must demonstrate both the interest and the capacity 
to either pursue greenfield investments in Canada, expand their existing facilities in Canada, invest in 
R&D opportunities/partnerships in Canada, and/or pursue any other relevant investment types aligned 
with the EDO’s value proposition. For specific country markets, especially those with state-owned 
defence and security enterprises, foreign government officials may be targeted for meetings as well, 
with approval from TGP. The Contractor will ensure a high-quality matchmaking experience for all 
participants. 
The work will involve researching, identifying, and generating a Microsoft Excel list of potential 
companies and inviting representative(s) of these companies to participate in meetings with EDOs. The 
Contractor will pre-qualify these companies and execute a proactive outreach campaign—via email, 
direct messaging and phone—to recruit company participants, assess their investment plans, capacity, 
and location requirements, and secure as many quality meetings as possible. It is expected to schedule 
a minimum of three (3) B2B meetings per Canadian municipality/province in attendance, for an 
estimated fifteen (15) provinces/cities. There is no minimum number of meetings to schedule for each 
investment officer participating from a European Embassy, High Commission, or Consulate.   
Note: Bidders will be evaluated on their ability to secure a higher number of potential investors and a 
higher number of quality meetings with genuine intent to explore foreign direct investment in Canada. 
4.2 Additional parameters for companies participating in the FDI matchmaking program:  
To ensure the quality and relevance of B2B meetings for EDO representatives, companies recruited must 
meet the following criteria:  
  
• 
Inclusions   
o Company size: minimum 25 employees, although smaller businesses with high potential 
may be considered (i.e., high growth startups) upon consultation with TGP 
o Expansion plan: Have the willingness and ability to make a new investment within the next 
2-3 years in Canada or North America or expand their existing footprint in Canada.  
o Project scope: Propose investments that are likely to generate CAPEX expenditure and 
create at least 5 jobs in the first 12 months of implementation  
o Level of representation: Decision makers and C-level senior managers/executives   
  
• 
Exclusions  
o Avoid businesses primarily engaged in business development/sales or finding 
customers in Canada  
o Avoid early-stage start-ups that lack the capacity for international expansion  
o Consultants, law and accounting firms, and other intermediaries representing 
potential investors are not considered targets for B2B meetings 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 44 of 57 
  
o The investment project must go beyond a simple sales office 
 
5. TASKS AND DELIVERABLES  
5.1 Initial Outreach and Engagement [Deliverable 1] 
• 
Review the documents on the participating EDOs that will be provided by TGP.  
• 
Provide TGP link to booking calendar for Canadian delegation to reserve/book date and time for 
one-on-one calls with the Contractor, suitable to Canadian time zones, by June 1, 2026.    
• 
Conduct one-on-one calls with each EDO to gain first-hand understanding of their unique 
investment value propositions and objectives at MSPO 2026, by June 12, 2026. These calls will 
enable the Contractor to schedule meetings that are most relevant for each EDO.   
• 
Conduct subsequent calls with the EDOs as necessary to exchange more information and 
updates, with the aim of optimizing matchmaking results.  
• 
Contact defence and security companies. 
• 
Provide recommendations to TGP on the best approach to B2B recruitment to identify the most 
beneficial matches from the perspectives of the Canadian EDO delegates and the target 
companies.   
5.2 Target Lists [Deliverable 2] 
• 
Pre-screen potential defence and security companies to take part in B2B meetings with Canadian 
cities/provinces.  
• 
Generate a list of high-potential target companies and executives for review and validation by 
TGP and ranking by Canadian EDO delegates. This list should include company profiles and 
contact information (Title or honorific, first name, surname, job title, company name, company 
profile (no more than fifty words), mobile number and email. The list should be provided to TGP 
by June 5, 2026, for completion of review and ranking by June 12, 2026.   
• 
Canadian EDO delegates will rank target companies based on a priority system. 
• 
Rank 1: High priority - Definitely want to meet with these companies. 
• 
Rank 2: Medium priority - May want to meet with these companies. 
• 
Rank 3: Low priority - Are not particularly interested but are open to meeting. 
• 
Rank 4: No interest - Are not interested in meeting with these companies. 
• 
Provide subsequent updated curated lists of target companies and executives as they become 
available for continuous validation and ranking. 
 
5.3 Market Briefing [Deliverable 3]  
• 
Deliver a virtual pre-event market briefing coordinated by TGP to Canadian EDO delegates at 
least two (2) weeks prior to the event. Date and time to be determined. 
• 
The briefing will introduce the B2B matchmaking program, the business culture of the European 
and Polish markets, information on the companies that have registered for the meetings, answer 
questions about the companies that will be met and provide advice on the type of information 
that may be requested by potential investors. 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 45 of 57 
  
5.4 Planning of B2B Meetings [Deliverable 4] 
• 
Organize a proactive email, direct message and phone campaign to recruit company participants; 
assess their investment plans, capacity, and location requirements; and schedule as many 
meetings as possible. Campaign should begin June 15, 2026.  
• 
Secure and confirm qualified and targeted companies to participate in FDI meetings with 
Canadian EDO delegates. 
• 
Coordinate and schedule a minimum of three (3) meetings for each of the Canadian 
cities/provinces in attendance, for an estimated fifteen (15) provinces/cities. The number of 
Canadian delegation members is to be confirmed. Each meeting will last 25 minutes. (Note: The 
previous experience of the Contractor in organizing and securing one-to-one meetings of this 
nature will be evaluated.) 
• 
Provide a preliminary B2B meeting schedule to TGP and preliminary individual meeting packages 
to each Canadian EDO by August 25, 2026. Each package should include a preliminary B2B 
meeting schedule (with dates, times, and locations of each meeting) and confirmed company 
profiles (with information on the company, the nature/type of investment projects or 
opportunities being sought, as well as the name(s), email address(es) and mobile phone 
number(s) of the of company representative(s) attending each meeting).  
(Note: TGP can provide sample B2B schedules and company profiles to the Contractor, upon 
request.) 
• 
Reconfirm all meetings with companies prior to the event, by August 28, 2026. If meetings are 
cancelled or postponed, the Contractor must make every effort to arrange alternative relevant 
meetings with local contacts that have been validated and ranked by the members of the 
Canadian EDO delegates.  
• 
Provide regular progress updates to TGP on the status of recruitment efforts – highlighting 
meetings arranged and confirmations received – on a weekly basis starting in June 2026 until 
August 2026.  
• 
As part of its outreach to arrange the B2B meetings, the Contractor will be asked to invite the list 
of targeted companies, through its network or targeted database, to networking events at MSPO 
identified by TGP. Dates and times of networking events are to be determined. Should the 
Contractor be asked to support recruitment for networking events, they will be expected to 
provide TGP the final list of confirmed companies and executives that accepted to participate. 
This list will include complete Title or honorific, first name, surname, job title, company name, 
company profile (no more than fifty words), mobile number and email. Reporting language shall 
be English.    
5.5 Coordination of B2B Meetings [Deliverable 5] 
• 
Provide TGP a final, printed schedule of B2B meetings by September 2, 2026, including the 
confirmed dates, times, and locations for each meeting. The schedule must be organized by 
each EDO.  
• 
Provide final B2B meeting packages to each Canadian EDO by September 2, 2026. The package 
must include the meeting schedule (which itself must include the dates, times, locations of each 
meeting), company profiles, the nature/type of investment projects or opportunities being 
sought, as well as the name(s), email address(es) and mobile phone number(s) of the of 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 46 of 57 
  
company representative(s) attending each meeting.  
• 
Provide at least three (3) official staff members to attend MSPO in person from September 7-11, 
2026, to assist with the on-site coordination of B2B meetings in accordance with the schedule. 
The Contractor will be required to name these staff members in their proposal and provide their 
curriculum vitae (CV). Staff member should have significant recent experience successfully 
executing similar projects. Any changes to the staff members appointed to attend in person 
must be approved by TGP.   
• 
The location of the B2B meetings is to be confirmed. Meetings may either take place at the 
Canada Pavilion (if so, TGP is responsible for coordinating access to this space) or at the 
companies' booths. Alternatively, meeting may take place in a separate meeting room at Targi 
Kielce.   
• 
The Contractor must make every effort to arrange alternate meetings in the event of 
cancellations or no-shows.  
5.6 Post-Event Reporting [Deliverable 6] 
• 
Provide TGP a comprehensive post-event report by October 9, 2026, that:   
o Evaluates B2B recruitment and matchmaking efforts (including metrics on meetings 
held, attendance, and an evaluation of outcomes) 
o Provides any feedback shared by company participants to assess satisfaction 
o Suggests potential follow up actions and recommendations for future matchmaking 
programs 
o Includes a list of companies that expressed interest in participating but were unable to 
do so. This list must include their full contact information: name, title, company profile, 
and email address. 
6. PROJECT MANAGEMENT CONTROL PROCEDURES  
• 
The individual identified in the proposal as the Project Manager shall maintain direct contact 
with the TGP to quickly follow up on activities outlined in the Work Schedule. 
• 
The Project Manager shall be available at all times before and during the event. 
• 
The Project Manager and two (2) additional representatives from the Contractor must be 
able to be physically present at Targi Kielce throughout MSPO, from September 7-11, 2026.  
 
7. TGP’S OBLIGATIONS  
• 
TGP will provide the Contractor with coordinates and value proposition details in English for 
each participating municipality/province and additional relevant information on EDO 
delegates, as received. 
• 
TGP will provide feedback to the Contractor in a timely manner throughout the planning 
execution of all contract deliverables.  
8. LOCATION OF WORK  
• 
All staff assigned to a contract resulting from these specifications must be prepared to work in 
close collaboration and frequent contact with TGP. All pre-meeting work will be done at the 
Contractor's premises.  

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 47 of 57 
  
• 
During the dates of MSPO 2026, from September 7-11, 2026, the Contractor will need to be 
physically present at the Targi Kielce exhibition centre to provide on-site assistance. 
9. LANGUAGE OF WORK  
The primary language for regular interactions and business meetings will be English. Proficiency in 
French and Polish is considered an asset. The Canadian delegation is fluent in both English and French. 
10. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS  
Not applicable.  
11.  PERIOD OF WORK 
From contract award date to October 9, 2026. 
12. WORK SCHEDULE  
The Contractor must comply with the below timelines and discuss with the Project Authority on any 
timing issues. The below timeline is tentative and subject to change. 
 
Deliverables 
Tasks 
Completion Date 
Deliverable 1 
Project kick-off and briefing 
June 1 
Provide TGP the booking calendar link for Canadian EDO 
delegates to schedule one-on-one calls 
June 1  
Introductory one-on-one calls with participating Canadian 
delegation to discuss objectives, interests, and value 
propositions 
From June 2-12 
Subsequent calls with participating Canadian delegation, as 
needed 
Ongoing 
Deliverable 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Initial list of targeted companies delivered to TGP for review 
and & preference ranking  
June 5 
Final list of companies to invite to B2B meetings completed.   
Contractor begins sending invitations and scheduling meetings 
June 12 
Successive updates to the targeted list of companies as they 
become available   
Ongoing 
Invitation follow-up and weekly status updates on recruitment 
efforts, meetings arranged and confirmations received  
Starting June 15 
and ongoing  
Deliverable 3 
Deliver virtual briefing on Europe defence & security market 
and meeting agenda details  
Week of August 17 
Deliverable 4 
 
 
 
 
Provide preliminary B2B meeting schedule (master) to TGP 
and individual meeting packages to Canadian EDO delegates 
(incl. individual meeting schedules, company profiles, 
nature/type of projects or investment opportunities, name(s) 
of representative(s)) 
August 25 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 48 of 57 
  
  
Reconfirm and finalize EDO-investor meetings  
August 28 
Deliverable 5 
Provide final B2B schedule (master) to TGP and individual 
meeting packages to Canadian EDO delegates (incl. individual 
meeting schedules, company profiles, nature/type of projects 
or investment opportunities, and name(s) of 
representative(s))  
September 2 
Deliverable 6 
Provide TGP post-event comprehensive report with metrics on 
meetings, feedback, and recommendations 
October 9 
 
13. TRAVEL REQUIREMENTS  
All travel requirements that the Bidder might deem adequate for the delivery of the Work defined in this 
Statement must be included in the fixed all-inclusive price that shall accompany the Bid. There shall be 
no reimbursement of any travel costs beyond the fixed all-inclusive price established at the time of 
contract award.  
The Contractor shall be responsible for all accommodation and travel expenses incurred by its personnel 
traveling to and from Targi Kielce for attendance at MSPO 2026. 
 
14. GOVERNMENT-FURNISHED EQUIPMENT / INFORMATION  
No government-furnished equipment shall be provided. 
 
15. TERMINOLOGY  
Some terms of arts linked to Foreign Direct Investment are being used in this Statement of Work. All 
other words in this Statement of Work shall be read and understood in their entire context and in their 
ordinary sense. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 49 of 57 
  
Annex - Basis of Payment 
Firm Price  
In consideration of the Contractor satisfactorily completing all its obligations under the Contract, the 
Contractor will be paid a firm price of EUR ________________ (inserted at contract award). Applicable 
taxes are included. 
 
In the instance that the Contractor is based outside of the Eurozone and is unable to accept payment in 
EUR, TGP will consider converting EUR to Polish Zlotys (PLN) or Canadian dollars (CAD) using the Bank of 
Canada’s rate published at 10:00 EDT (Eastern Daylight Time, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) on May 18, 2026. 
Were the currency of submission not included in that publication; TGP will use the Daily Mid Rate 
published by Oanda on May 18, 2026. 
 
Schedule of Milestones   
Payments will be made by wire transfer. 
The schedule of milestones for which payments will be made in accordance with the Contract, as per 
section 5. Tasks and Deliverables of the Statement of Work, is as follows: 
Payment 
No. 
Deliverable 
No. 
Deliverable/Description 
Firm Amount (€) 
VAT-Included 
Due Date/ 
Delivery Date 
1 
Del. 1 
Conclusion of kick-off meeting and one-on-one calls 
with all Canadian delegation organizations to discuss 
interests, priorities, and value propositions.  
30% of firm price 
June 5, 2026 
Del. 2 
Receipt and acceptance of initial and final lists of 
high-potential target companies and executives.   
2 
Del. 3 
Delivery, receipt, and acceptance of virtual market 
briefing presentation. 
40% of firm price 
September 2, 
2026 
Del. 4 
Receipt, and acceptance of initial meeting schedule 
and individual meeting packages for each Canadian 
delegate organization, including company profiles.   
Del. 5 
Receipt, and acceptance the final meeting schedule 
(master) and individual meeting packages for the 
Canadian delegation. 
3 
Del. 6 
On-site meeting coordination, including the 
organization of alternative meetings. 
30% of firm price 
October 9, 2026 
Post-event comprehensive report with metrics on 
meetings, feedback, and recommendations. 
 
All payments will be processed within 30 days upon receipt of the invoice. 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 50 of 57 
  
Annex – Financial Offer Form 
 
Name of 
Company: 
 
Address: 
 
Contact person: 
 
Phone number: 
 
E-mail: 
 
 
Firm Price  
 
In consideration of the Contractor satisfactorily completing all its obligations under the Contract, the 
Contractor will be paid a firm price of EUR ________________. Applicable taxes are included. 
 
In the instance that the Contractor is based outside of the Eurozone and is unable to accept payment in 
EUR, TGP will consider converting EUR to Polish Zlotys (PLN) or Canadian dollars (CAD) using the Bank of 
Canada’s rate published at 10:00 EDT (Eastern Daylight Time, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) on May 18, 2026. 
Were the currency of submission not included in that publication; TGP will use the Daily Mid Rate 
published by Oanda on May 18, 2026. 
 
Important Notes: 
• 
The Firm Price includes, but is not necessarily limited to, all costs resulting from the performance 
of the Work as described in the Statement of Work, all costs resulting from the performance of 
any additional Work described in the Bidder’s Bid (unless clearly described as an option), all 
travel, living costs and all overhead costs including disbursements. 
• 
Bidders must provide the breakdown of costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 51 of 57 
  
Annex - Technical Evaluation Criteria 
Criterion 
Title 
Rating Scale 
MANDATORY CRITERION 
M1. Company profile 
The Bidders must provide: 
a) the merits and demonstrated value of their respective 
organization. 
 
PASS or FAIL 
 
M2. References 
Bidders must provide at least 3 previous or current clients as 
references for projects of similar size and scope. TGP may contact 
the references to confirm the information provided and quality of 
services.   
 
The information must include: name of individual, name of 
organization, email, and phone number.  
PASS or FAIL 
 
M3. Experience and 
Expertise of the 
Project Team 
The Bidders must include the qualifications, expertise, and professional 
backgrounds of the team assigned to the project (The Project Manager 
and minimum two (2) additional representatives). 
 
For each Project Member, the Bidder must include:  
a) at least three (3) recent projects of similar size and/or scope or 
an equivalent combination of larger, smaller projects, including 
at least two (2) targeting the defence and security sector 
completed in the last five (5) years. Each project must include 
a brief description of the scope and results, as well as clients’ 
names, project dates, and timeframes.    
b) the curriculum vitae (CV). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PASS or FAIL 
 
PASS or FAIL 
POINT-RATED CRITERION 
PR 1. Experience in 
Business-to-
Business 
Matchmaking 
Services  
Bidders must demonstrate:  
- 
Knowledge and experience in foreign direct investment 
prospecting (i.e. providing investment leads), matchmaking 
services, and meeting scheduling, including a concise 
description of such experience in the last five (5) years.    
- 
Relevant experience in the defence and security sectors in 
Europe, including a robust network of senior business 
stakeholders in these sectors, is required. Experience in the 
defence and security sectors outside of Europe shall be 
considered an asset.   
30 maximum 
points 
PR 2. Understanding 
of the Methodology 
and Delivery Strategy 
PR 2.1 Methodology for identifying companies and generating qualified 
investment leads for Canada.  
25 maximum 
points 
PR 2.2 Overall coordination and delivery strategy of the B2B program. 
25 maximum 
points 
OPTIONAL POINT-RATED CRITERION 
PR 3. Value-added 
services 
The Bidders may include additional value-added services that could 
benefit the mission in their proposals. 
10 bonus 
points 
 
TOTAL POINTS  
90 
MINIMUM POINTS REQUIRED  
48 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 52 of 57 
  
1.0 
Mandatory Technical Criteria  
 
The bid must meet the mandatory requirements as per the Statement of Work. The Bidder must provide 
the necessary documentation to demonstrate compliance with this requirement. Bids that do not meet the 
mandatory technical criteria will be considered non-responsive. Each mandatory technical criterion should 
be addressed separately. 
 
M1. 
Company profile 
 
In order to be considered responsive, the Bidders must provide: 
a) the merits and demonstrated value of their respective organization. 
M2. 
References 
 
In order to be considered responsive, the Bidders must provide at least 3 previous or current clients as 
references for projects of similar size and scope. TGP may contact the references to confirm the 
information provided and quality of services.   
 
The information must include: name of individual, name of organization, email, and phone number. 
 
M3. 
Experience and Expertise of the Project Team 
 
In order to be considered responsive, the Bidders must demonstrate that the staff that will be working on 
the project have the capacity, capabilities, expertise and network to provide all required services and 
deliverables listed in the Statement of Work.   
Personnel who have direct experience in investment attraction and engagement with high-level business 
stakeholders are prioritized. Personnel with a strong network of business contacts in the defence and 
security sectors will also be prioritized, and an established network of global defence and security 
contacts shall be considered an asset.     
The response must include the qualifications, expertise, and professional backgrounds of the team 
assigned to the project.  
For each Project Member, the Bidders must provide:  
a) at least three (3) recent projects of similar size and/or scope or an equivalent combination of 
larger, smaller projects, including at least two (2) targeting the defence and security sector 
completed in the last five (5) years. Each project must include a brief description of the scope and 
results, as well as clients’ names, project dates, and timeframes; 
b) the curriculum vitae (CV). 
 
2.0 
 Point-Rated Technical Evaluation Criteria  
 
Proposals that meet all of the mandatory technical criteria will be evaluated and point-rated against the 
criteria listed below, using the evaluation factors and weighting indicators indicated. 
 
Bidders must obtain the required minimum of 48 points overall of the 90 points available in order 
to be evaluated on the basis of their financial proposal. 
 
IMPORTANT: A Bidder must obtain a minimum of 48 points for the optional point-rated criterion be added 
to the score. 
 
Any bid which fails to obtain the required minimum will be declared non-compliant. 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 53 of 57 
  
PR 1. 
Experience in Business-to-Business Matchmaking Services (maximum 30 points) 
 
Bidders are required to demonstrate knowledge and experience in foreign direct investment 
prospecting (i.e. providing investment leads) and matchmaking services along with meeting scheduling, 
providing a concise description of such experience in the last five (5) years.  
 
Relevant experience in the defence and security sectors in Europe, including a robust network of senior 
business stakeholders in these sectors, is required. Experience in the defence and security sectors 
outside of Europe shall be considered an asset.   
 
To do so, bidders must provide a concise description of their relevant experience through three (3) 
strong examples of projects completed within the last five (5) years. At least two (2) of these projects 
must have targeted the defence and security sectors. Each example should clearly outline the client’s 
name, the project timeline (dates and duration), and a detailed description of the project’s scope and 
results. Please note that the issuer may reach out to these references to inquire further about the bidder’s 
performance and success in delivering the results described. These references can be the same as in 
section M2. 
Rating Table for PR 1. 
 
Rating 
Description 
Excellent 22-30 points 
Demonstrate significant and exceptional details of experience leading to a 
complete and thorough understanding of the requirement. 
Satisfactory 15-21 
points 
Demonstrate satisfactorily details of experience and contains several value-
added elements. 
Limited 8-14 points 
The response includes limited and/or outdated details of experience. 
Poor 0-7 point 
The response includes insufficient and/or unrelated details of experience. 
 
PR 2. 
Understanding of the Methodology and Delivery Strategy (maximum 50 points) 
 
PR 2.1 Methodology for identifying local companies and generating qualified leads. 
 
Bidders must clearly explain their approach for identifying local companies and recruiting qualified leads 
for the B2B meetings. 
 
Bidders must include a clear description of the methods and sources utilized for gathering contact 
details. These sources may include personal networks, primary research, commercial databases (e.g., 
Dun & Bradstreet), or other verified and reliable platforms, ensuring a strong and credible foundation for 
outreach efforts. 
Rating Table for PR 2.1 
 
Rating 
Description 
Excellent 19-25 points 
Exceptionally strategic, with a clear, logical process and well-defined steps. 
Satisfactory 13-18 
points 
Generally clear and strategic, some steps may lack detail.  

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 54 of 57 
  
Limited 7-12 points 
Shows some strategic thought but lack clarity in the process and steps.  
Poor 0-6 point 
Approach is unclear, lacks clarity and/or strategic direction.  
PR 2.2 Overall coordination and delivery strategy of the B2B program 
 
The Bidders must clearly explain the proposed strategy to deliver the required services and demonstrate 
their ability to meet deadlines listed in the Statement of Work.  
 
To do so, Bidders must provide a detailed description of the process and steps that will be employed to 
achieve the project’s objectives. The response should include the proposed team leader and team 
members to be assigned to each of the activities as outlined in the Statement of Work under “Tasks” and 
“Deliverables". 
Rating Table for PR 2.2 
 
Rating 
Description 
Excellent 19-25 points 
Demonstrate significant and exceptional details, the process is well defined 
and comprehensive. The response exceeds the expectation. 
Satisfactory 13-18 
points 
The response includes a substantive amount of the information required to 
be complete and contains several value-added elements.  
Limited 7-12 points 
The response includes some of the information required to be complete 
meeting the established minimum and contains no significant weaknesses.  
Poor 0-6 point 
The response includes very limited or no information.  
 
PR 3. 
Value-added services (maximum 10 extra points) 
 
The Bidders may include additional value-added services that could benefit the mission in their proposals. 
 
Rating Table for PR 3. 
 
Rating 
Description 
Excellent 8-10 points 
The value-added services proposed exceeds the expectations and can 
definitely improve the B2B program. 
Limited 4-7 points 
The value-added services proposed meets the expectations and could 
potentially improve the B2B program. 
Poor 0-3 point 
The value-added services proposed do not meet the expectation and/or are 
not relevant to the B2B program. 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 55 of 57 
  
Annex – Security Requirements Check List 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 56 of 57 
  
 
 

                                                   
   
Solicitation of Offers Number: 27-317911-WSAW-SL 
 
Page 57 of 57 
  
 
