NOTICE OF PROPOSED PROCUREMENT (NPP) 
 
Title: Fall Protection and Belay Techniques 
 
Requirement: The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has a requirement for services to support the 
inspection of ship cargo holds prior to loading. As part of these activities to meet operational requirements, the 
CFIA has a requirement for the joint development and implementation of a Fall Protection Plan, which must be 
reviewed and updated periodically as required by the Agency. The requirement also includes the provision of 
mandatory training in fall prevention and safe work methods for all affected CFIA employees, as well as the 
annual inspection of all fall protection equipment used during ship cargo hold inspections. 
 
The requirement includes: 
 
 
The development of a Fall Protection Plan, 
 
The delivery of mandatory training on fall prevention and safe work practices, and 
 
Inspection of CFIA fall protection equipment. 
 
This requirement is to be competitively solicited through a Request for Proposal (RFP). The Crown reserves 
the right to negotiate with any supplier as part of this procurement. 
 
Trade Agreements: This procurement is not subject to the provision of any trade agreements. 
 
Contract Period: The resulting contract is anticipated to be awarded for an initial period from contract award to 
March 31st, 2027, with three (3) additional one-year option periods, exercisable at the discretion of the Crown. 
 
Delivery Location: The Work will be performed in the Province of Québec (QC), Canada, specifically in the 
following regions: 
 
 
Montréal, QC, 
 
Québec City, QC, 
 
Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, or surrounding areas 
 
Security Requirements: There is no security requirement associated with this procurement. 
 
Official Languages: All solicitation documents, including any amendments, will be posted on CanadaBuys 
(https://canadabuys.canada.ca) in both of Canada’s official languages. 
 
Enquiries: All enquiries related to this requirement must be submitted in writing to the Contracting Authority 
identified below. Enquiries may be submitted by email to the Contracting Authority in either official language; all 
questions will be answered through an amendment to the solicitation. 
 
Catherine Clairoux 
Senior Procurement and Contracting Officer 
Contracting and Procurement Policy Division (CPPS) 
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) 
Government of Canada 
catherine.clairoux@inspection.gc.ca  
 
Offerors may request a debriefing on the results of the solicitation process. Requests must be submitted to the 
Contracting Authority within fifteen (15) business days following receipt of the results of the solicitation 
process. Debriefings may be provided in writing, by telephone, or via Microsoft Teams. 
 
